We have previously reported that the statin mevastatin (compactin) reversibly 
inhibits the fusion of TRAP-positive mononuclear preosteoclasts (pOCs) into 
multinucleated osteoclasts and disrupts the actin ring in mature osteoclasts 
through the inhibition of protein prenylation. Protein geranylgeranylation, 
specifically, is known to be required for pOC fusion and for the function and 
survival of mature osteoclasts. However, it has not been determined whether 
protein geranylgeranylation is involved in early differentiation of osteoclasts 
(pOC formation). The current study shows that statins and the geranylgeranyl 
transferase I inhibitor GGTI-2166 inhibit the pOC formation induced by RANKL or 
TNF-alpha in cultures of both mouse marrow-derived macrophage-colony-stimulating 
factor (M-CSF) dependent monocytes (MD cells) and the mouse monocyte cell line 
RAW 264.7 (RAW cells). Mevastatin, 0.1-0.6 microM, inhibited the formation of 
pOCs induced by receptor activator of nuclear factor-kappaB ligand (RANKL) or 
tumor necrosis factor (TNF-alpha) in both cell cultures. The inhibitory effects 
of mevastatin were overcome by the addition of mevalonate, farnesyl 
pyrophosphate or geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate. GGTI-2166 inhibited TRAP activity 
induced by RANKL or TNF-alpha in both cell cultures and prevented the 
incorporation of [3H]all-trans geranylgeraniol into prenylated proteins in RAW 
cells. However, the farnesyl transferase inhibitor FTI-2153 did not inhibit TRAP 
activity although FTI prevented the incorporation of [14C]mevalonate into 
farnesylated proteins in RAW cells. Clostridium difficile cytotoxin B (toxin B) 
inhibited pOC formation induced by RANKL or TNF-alpha in both cell cultures. The 
inhibitory effects of statins and GGTI-2166 on pOC formation may result from the 
inhibition of the geranylgeranylation of G-proteins, such as Rho or Rac, 
suggesting that the geranylgeranylation of these proteins is involved in the 
early differentiation of progenitor cells into pOCs.
