Norway rats (Rattus norvegicus) are globally distributed and concentrate in 
urban environments, where they live and feed in closer proximity to human 
populations than most other mammals. Despite the potential role of rats as 
reservoirs of zoonotic diseases, the microbial diversity present in urban rat 
populations remains unexplored. In this study, we used targeted molecular assays 
to detect known bacterial, viral, and protozoan human pathogens and unbiased 
high-throughput sequencing to identify novel viruses related to agents of human 
disease in commensal Norway rats in New York City. We found that these rats are 
infected with bacterial pathogens known to cause acute or mild gastroenteritis 
in people, including atypical enteropathogenic Escherichia coli, Clostridium 
difficile, and Salmonella enterica, as well as infectious agents that have been 
associated with undifferentiated febrile illnesses, including Bartonella spp., 
Streptobacillus moniliformis, Leptospira interrogans, and Seoul hantavirus. We 
also identified a wide range of known and novel viruses from groups that contain 
important human pathogens, including sapoviruses, cardioviruses, kobuviruses, 
parechoviruses, rotaviruses, and hepaciviruses. The two novel hepaciviruses 
discovered in this study replicate in the liver of Norway rats and may have 
utility in establishing a small animal model of human hepatitis C virus 
infection. The results of this study demonstrate the diversity of microbes 
carried by commensal rodent species and highlight the need for improved pathogen 
surveillance and disease monitoring in urban environments. Importance: The 
observation that most emerging infectious diseases of humans originate in animal 
reservoirs has led to wide-scale microbial surveillance and discovery programs 
in wildlife, particularly in the developing world. Strikingly, less attention 
has been focused on commensal animals like rats, despite their abundance in 
urban centers and close proximity to human populations. To begin to explore the 
zoonotic disease risk posed by urban rat populations, we trapped and surveyed 
Norway rats collected in New York City over a 1-year period. This analysis 
revealed a striking diversity of known pathogens and novel viruses in our study 
population, including multiple agents associated with acute gastroenteritis or 
febrile illnesses in people. Our findings indicate that urban rats are 
reservoirs for a vast diversity of microbes that may affect human health and 
indicate a need for increased surveillance and awareness of the disease risks 
associated with urban rodent infestation.
