BACKGROUND: Clostridium difficile is currently the leading cause of infectious 
diarrhea in hospitalized patients. In addition to the infection due to toxigenic 
C. difficile in the gastrointestinal tract of susceptible hosts, other 
predisposing factors for C. difficile infection (CDI) are identified, including 
advanced age, a prolonged hospital stay, and use of acid-suppressive drugs. Of 
note, exposure to gastric acid-reducing agents, such as H2 blockers and proton 
pump inhibitors (PPIs), remains a controversial risk factor, and has been 
associated with CDI in some studies but not in others. A mouse model of 
antibiotic-associated clostridial colitis was established to examine the role of 
PPIs for CDI.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A mouse model of antibiotic-associated clostridial 
colitis was set up. NF-κB reporter mice were used to address the in vivo spatial 
and temporal inflammatory patterns of C. difficile-associated colitis. Serum 
levels of lipopolysaccharide and dextran-FITC were measured to reflect the 
barrier permeability of affected intestines.
RESULTS: Mice with CDI that were exposed to PPI exhibited greater losses of 
stool consistency and body and cecal weights than those that were not exposed to 
PPI. Further, more neutrophilic infiltrations, epithelial damage, and 
inflammatory cytokine expression were noted in colon specimens of the mice with 
PPI exposure. More-evident inflammatory responses were detected by in vivo 
imaging of NF-κB reporter mice with CDI that were exposed to PPI. Gut barrier 
permeability was increased to a greater extent, as reflected by higher serum 
levels of lipopolysaccharide and dextran-FITC in mice with CDI that were exposed 
to PPI.
CONCLUSIONS: Our mouse model demonstrates that PPI exposure increases the 
severity of intestinal inflammation in mice with C. difficile-associated 
colitis.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Infectious Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For Permissions, 
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.
