Clostridium difficile causes nosocomial/antibiotic-associated diarrhoea and 
pseudomembranous colitis. The major virulence factors are toxin A and toxin B 
(TcdB), which inactivate GTPases by monoglucosylation, leading to cytopathic 
(cytoskeleton alteration, cell rounding) and cytotoxic effects (cell-cycle 
arrest, apoptosis). C. difficile toxins breaching the intestinal epithelial 
barrier can act on underlying cells, enterocytes, colonocytes, and enteric 
neurons, as described in vitro and in vivo, but until now no data have been 
available on enteric glial cell (EGC) susceptibility. EGCs are crucial for 
regulating the enteric nervous system, gut homeostasis, the immune and 
inflammatory responses, and digestive and extradigestive diseases. Therefore, we 
evaluated the effects of C. difficile TcdB in EGCs. Rat-transformed EGCs were 
treated with TcdB at 0.1-10 ng/ml for 1.5-48 h, and several parameters were 
analysed. TcdB induces the following in EGCs: (1) early cell rounding with Rac1 
glucosylation; (2) early G2/M cell-cycle arrest by cyclin B1/Cdc2 complex 
inactivation caused by p27 upregulation, the downregulation of cyclin B1 and 
Cdc2 phosphorylated at Thr161 and Tyr15; and (3) apoptosis by a 
caspase-dependent but mitochondria-independent pathway. Most importantly, the 
stimulation of EGCs with TNF-α plus IFN-γ before, concomitantly or after TcdB 
treatment strongly increased TcdB-induced apoptosis. Furthermore, EGCs that 
survived the cytotoxic effect of TcdB did not recover completely and showed not 
only persistent Rac1 glucosylation, cell-cycle arrest and low apoptosis but also 
increased production of glial cell-derived neurotrophic factor, suggesting 
self-rescuing mechanisms. In conclusion, the high susceptibility of EGCs to TcdB 
in vitro, the increased sensitivity to inflammatory cytokines related to 
apoptosis and the persistence of altered functions in surviving cells suggest an 
important in vivo role of EGCs in the pathogenesis of C. difficile infection.
