Clostridium difficile is a spore-forming anaerobic bacterium that causes colitis 
in patients with disrupted colonic microbiota. While some individuals are 
asymptomatic C. difficile carriers, symptomatic disease ranges from mild 
diarrhea to potentially lethal toxic megacolon. The wide disease spectrum has 
been attributed to the infected host's age, underlying diseases, immune status, 
and microbiome composition. However, strain-specific differences in C. difficile 
virulence have also been implicated in determining colitis severity. Because 
patients infected with C. difficile are unique in terms of medical history, 
microbiome composition, and immune competence, determining the relative 
contribution of C. difficile virulence to disease severity has been challenging, 
and conclusions regarding the virulence of specific strains have been 
inconsistent. To address this, we used a mouse model to test 33 clinical 
C. difficile strains isolated from patients with disease severities ranging from 
asymptomatic carriage to severe colitis, and we determined their relative in 
vivo virulence in genetically identical, antibiotic-pretreated mice. We found 
that murine infections with C. difficile clade 2 strains (including multilocus 
sequence type 1/ribotype 027) were associated with higher lethality and that 
C. difficile strains associated with greater human disease severity caused more 
severe disease in mice. While toxin production was not strongly correlated with 
in vivo colonic pathology, the ability of C. difficile strains to grow in the 
presence of secondary bile acids was associated with greater disease severity. 
Whole-genome sequencing and identification of core and accessory genes 
identified a subset of accessory genes that distinguish high-virulence from 
lower-virulence C. difficile strains.IMPORTANCEClostridium difficile is an 
important cause of hospital-associated intestinal infections, and recent years 
have seen an increase in the number and severity of cases in the United States. 
A patient's antibiotic history, immune status, and medical comorbidities 
determine, in part, the severity of C. difficile infection. The relative 
virulence of different clinical C. difficile strains, although postulated to 
determine disease severity in patients, has been more difficult to consistently 
associate with mild versus severe colitis. We tested 33 distinct clinical 
C. difficile isolates for their ability to cause disease in genetically 
identical mice and found that C. difficile strains belonging to clade 2 were 
associated with higher mortality. Differences in survival were not attributed to 
differences in toxin production but likely resulted from the distinct gene 
content in the various clinical isolates.
