Earlier, we reported that three Food and Drug Administration-approved drugs, 
trifluoperazine (TFP; an antipsychotic), amoxapine (AXPN; an antidepressant), 
and doxapram (DXP; a breathing stimulant), identified from an in vitro murine 
macrophage cytotoxicity screen, provided mice with 40 to 60% protection against 
pneumonic plague when administered at the time of infection for 1 to 3 days. In 
the present study, the therapeutic potential of these drugs against pneumonic 
plague in mice was further evaluated when they were administered at up to 48 h 
postinfection. While the efficacy of TFP was somewhat diminished as treatment 
was delayed to 24 h, the protection of mice with AXPN and DXP increased as 
treatment was progressively delayed to 24 h. At 48 h postinfection, these drugs 
provided the animals with significant protection (up to 100%) against challenge 
with the agent of pneumonic or bubonic plague when they were administered in 
combination with levofloxacin. Likewise, when they were used in combination with 
vancomycin, all three drugs provided mice with 80 to 100% protection from fatal 
oral Clostridium difficile infection when they were administered at 24 h 
postinfection. Furthermore, AXPN provided 40 to 60% protection against 
respiratory infection with Klebsiella pneumoniae when it was administered at the 
time of infection or at 24 h postinfection. Using the same in vitro cytotoxicity 
assay, we identified an additional 76/780 nonantibiotic drugs effective against 
K. pneumoniae For Acinetobacter baumannii, 121 nonantibiotic drugs were 
identified to inhibit bacterium-induced cytotoxicity in murine macrophages. Of 
these 121 drugs, 13 inhibited the macrophage cytotoxicity induced by two 
additional multiple-antibiotic-resistant strains. Six of these drugs decreased 
the intracellular survival of all three A. baumannii strains in macrophages. 
These results provided further evidence of the broad applicability and 
utilization of drug repurposing screening to identify new therapeutics to combat 
multidrug-resistant pathogens of public health concern.
