Clostridium difficile toxin B (cdtB) is a critical virulence factor 
characterized with potential cytotoxicity and pro-inflammatory activity. This 
study aims to investigate anti-tumor effects of cdtB on breast cancer 
development. Clostridium difficile strain was cultured and cdtB recombinant 
protein (rcdtB) was synthesized. Breast cancer cell line, MDA-MB-231, was 
divided into Normal control, rcdtB 50, 100, 200 and 400 ng/ml group in vitro. 
Mice were divided into Normal control and rcdtB treatment group (400 ng/ml) in 
vivo. 3-(4,5-dimethyl-2-thiazolyl)-2,5-diphenyl-2-H-tetrazolium bromide (MTT) 
assay was performed to evaluate inhibitive effects of rcdtB on cell growth. Flow 
cytometry and transferase-mediated deoxyuridine triphosphate-biotin nick end 
labeling (TUNEL) were employed to examine apoptosis in vitro and in vivo, 
respectively. Cell cycle distribution was analyzed by utilizing commercial kit. 
B-cell lymphoma-2 (Bcl-2) and Bcl-2-associated X protein (Bax) were examined 
using western blot. Inflammatory response was detected using haematoxylin and 
eosin (HE). Erythroblastic leukemia viral oncogene homolog 2 (C-erbB-2) and 
cyclooxygenase-2 (Cox-2) were examined using immunohistochemical and 
immunofluorescence assay, respectively. The results indicated that rcdtB 
significantly induced MDA-MB-231 death, inhibited growth and decreased S-phase 
cells compared to Normal control group (P < 0.05). rcdtB significantly induced 
early and late apoptosis, and decreased Bcl-2 levels compared to Normal control 
group (P < 0.05). rcdtB significantly inhibited cell migration compared to 
Normal control group (P < 0.05). rcdtB significantly inhibited tumor growth and 
activated inflammation of breast cancer model compared to Normal control group 
(P < 0.01). rcdtB significantly reduced C-erbB-2 and Cox-2 in tumor tissues 
compared to Normal control group (P < 0.01). In conclusion, rcdtB treatment 
inhibited tumor growth and induced apoptosis through inhibiting Bcl-2 
expression, inflammatory responses, and activating C-erbB-2 and Cox-2 expression 
in breast cancer mouse model.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.. All rights 
reserved.
