Antibiotics alter the gut microbiota and decrease resistance to Clostridium 
difficile colonization; however, the mechanisms driving colonization resistance 
are not well understood. Loss of resistance to C. difficile colonization due to 
antibiotic treatment is associated with alterations in the gut metabolome, 
specifically, with increases in levels of nutrients that C. difficile can 
utilize for growth in vitro. To define the nutrients that C. difficile requires 
for colonization and pathogenesis in vivo, we used a combination of mass 
spectrometry and RNA sequencing (RNA Seq) to model the gut metabolome and 
C. difficile transcriptome throughout an acute infection in a mouse model at the 
following time points: 0, 12, 24, and 30 h. We also performed multivariate-based 
integration of the omics data to define the signatures that were most important 
throughout colonization and infection. Here we show that amino acids, in 
particular, proline and branched-chain amino acids, and carbohydrates decrease 
in abundance over time in the mouse cecum and that C. difficile gene expression 
is consistent with their utilization in vivo. This was also reinforced by the 
multivariate-based integration of the omics data where we were able to 
discriminate the metabolites and transcripts that support C. difficile 
physiology between the different time points throughout colonization and 
infection. This report illustrates how important the availability of amino acids 
and other nutrients is for the initial stages of C. difficile colonization and 
progression of disease. Future studies identifying the source of the nutrients 
and engineering bacteria capable of outcompeting C. difficile in the gut will be 
important for developing new targeted bacterial therapeutics. IMPORTANCE 
Clostridium difficile is a bacterial pathogen of global significance that is a 
major cause of antibiotic-associated diarrhea. Antibiotics deplete the 
indigenous gut microbiota and change the metabolic environment in the gut to one 
favoring C. difficile growth. Here we used metabolomics and transcriptomics to 
define the gut environment after antibiotics and during the initial stages of 
C. difficile colonization and infection. We show that amino acids, in 
particular, proline and branched-chain amino acids, and carbohydrates decrease 
in abundance over time and that C. difficile gene expression is consistent with 
their utilization by the bacterium in vivo. We employed an integrated approach 
to analyze the metabolome and transcriptome to identify associations between 
metabolites and transcripts. This highlighted the importance of key nutrients in 
the early stages of colonization, and the data provide a rationale for the 
development of therapies based on the use of bacteria that specifically compete 
for nutrients that are essential for C. difficile colonization and disease.
