With wild rodents and insectivores being present around humans and their living, 
working and food production environments, it is important to gain knowledge of 
the zoonotic pathogens present in these animals. The enteropathogen Clostridium 
difficile, an opportunistic anaerobic bacteria, can be carried by both animals 
and humans, and is distributed globally. It is known that there is genetic 
overlap between human and animal sources of C. difficile. In this study, the aim 
was to assess the presence of C. difficile in rodents and insectivores trapped 
on and around pig and cattle farms in the Netherlands. In total 347 rodents and 
insectivores (10 different species) were trapped and 39·2% tested positive for 
presence of C. difficile. For all positive samples the ribotype (RT) was 
determined, and in total there were 13 different RTs found (in descending order 
of frequency: 057, 010, 029, 005, 073, 078, 015, 035, 454, 014, 058, 062, 087). 
Six of the RTs isolated from rodents and insectivores are known to be associated 
with human C. difficile infection; RT005, RT010, RT014, RT015, RT078 and RT087. 
The presence of rodents and insectivores in and around food production buildings 
(e.g. farms) could contribute to the spread of C. difficile in the human 
environment. In order to enable on-farm management for pathogen control, it is 
essential to comprehend the role of wild rodents and insectivores that could 
potentially affect the ecology of disease agents on farms. SIGNIFICANCE AND 
IMPACT OF THE STUDY: This study shows that rodents and insectivores in and 
around food production buildings (e.g. farms) can carry Clostridium difficile 
ribotypes associated with human C. difficile infection (CDI). C. difficile 
spores in rodent and insectivore droppings are able to survive in the 
environment for prolonged periods, leading to host-to-host exposure and 
transmission. Therefore we can state that rodent and insectivore presence on 
farms is a risk for zoonotic pathogen transmission of C. difficile.

© 2019 The Authors. Letters in Applied Microbiology published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd on behalf of Society for Applied Microbiology.
