Clostridioides difficile (formerly Clostridium difficile) infection (CDI) can 
result from the disruption of the resident gut microbiota. Western diets and 
popular weight-loss diets drive large changes in the gut microbiome; however, 
the literature is conflicted with regard to the effect of diet on CDI. Using the 
hypervirulent strain C. difficile R20291 (RT027) in a mouse model of 
antibiotic-induced CDI, we assessed disease outcome and microbial community 
dynamics in mice fed two high-fat diets in comparison with a high-carbohydrate 
diet and a standard rodent diet. The two high-fat diets exacerbated CDI, with a 
high-fat/high-protein, Atkins-like diet leading to severe CDI and 100% mortality 
and a high-fat/low-protein, medium-chain-triglyceride (MCT)-like diet inducing 
highly variable CDI outcomes. In contrast, mice fed a high-carbohydrate diet 
were protected from CDI, despite the high levels of refined carbohydrate and low 
levels of fiber in the diet. A total of 28 members of the Lachnospiraceae and 
Ruminococcaceae decreased in abundance due to diet and/or antibiotic treatment; 
these organisms may compete with C. difficile for amino acids and protect 
healthy animals from CDI in the absence of antibiotics. Together, these data 
suggest that antibiotic treatment might lead to loss of C. difficile competitors 
and create a favorable environment for C. difficile proliferation and virulence 
with effects that are intensified by high-fat/high-protein diets; in contrast, 
high-carbohydrate diets might be protective regardless of the source of 
carbohydrate or of antibiotic-driven loss of C. difficile competitors.IMPORTANCE 
The role of Western and weight-loss diets with extreme macronutrient composition 
in the risk and progression of CDI is poorly understood. In a longitudinal 
study, we showed that a high-fat/high-protein, Atkins-type diet greatly 
exacerbated antibiotic-induced CDI, whereas a high-carbohydrate diet protected, 
despite the high monosaccharide and starch content. Our study results, 
therefore, suggest that popular high-fat/high-protein weight-loss diets may 
enhance CDI risk during antibiotic treatment, possibly due to the synergistic 
effects of a loss of the microorganisms that normally inhibit C. difficile 
overgrowth and an abundance of amino acids that promote C. difficile overgrowth. 
In contrast, a high-carbohydrate diet might be protective, despite reports on 
the recent evolution of enhanced carbohydrate metabolism in C. difficile.
