Clostridioides difficile infection (CDI) can result in severe disease and death, 
with no accurate models that allow for early prediction of adverse outcomes. To 
address this need, we sought to develop serum-based biomarker models to predict 
CDI outcomes. We prospectively collected sera ≤48 h after diagnosis of CDI in 
two cohorts. Biomarkers were measured with a custom multiplex bead array assay. 
Patients were classified using IDSA severity criteria and the development of 
disease-related complications (DRCs), which were defined as ICU admission, 
colectomy, and/or death attributed to CDI. Unadjusted and adjusted models were 
built using logistic and elastic net modeling. The best model for severity 
included procalcitonin (PCT) and hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) with an area 
(AUC) under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve of 0.74 (95% 
confidence interval, 0.67 to 0.81). The best model for 30-day mortality included 
interleukin-8 (IL-8), PCT, CXCL-5, IP-10, and IL-2Rα with an AUC of 0.89 (0.84 
to 0.95). The best model for DRCs included IL-8, procalcitonin, HGF, and IL-2Rα 
with an AUC of 0.84 (0.73 to 0.94). To validate our models, we employed 
experimental infection of mice with C. difficile Antibiotic-treated mice were 
challenged with C. difficile and a similar panel of serum biomarkers was 
measured. Applying each model to the mouse cohort of severe and nonsevere CDI 
revealed AUCs of 0.59 (0.44 to 0.74), 0.96 (0.90 to 1.0), and 0.89 (0.81 to 
0.97). In both human and murine CDI, models based on serum biomarkers predicted 
adverse CDI outcomes. Our results support the use of serum-based biomarker 
panels to inform Clostridioides difficile infection treatment.IMPORTANCE Each 
year in the United States, Clostridioides difficile causes nearly 500,000 
gastrointestinal infections that range from mild diarrhea to severe colitis and 
death. The ability to identify patients at increased risk for severe disease or 
mortality at the time of diagnosis of C. difficile infection (CDI) would allow 
clinicians to effectively allocate disease modifying therapies. In this study, 
we developed models consisting of only a small number of serum biomarkers that 
are capable of predicting both 30-day all-cause mortality and adverse outcomes 
of patients at time of CDI diagnosis. We were able to validate these models 
through experimental mouse infection. This provides evidence that the biomarkers 
reflect the underlying pathophysiology and that our mouse model of CDI reflects 
the pathogenesis of human infection. Predictive models can not only assist 
clinicians in identifying patients at risk for severe CDI but also be utilized 
for targeted enrollment in clinical trials aimed at reduction of adverse 
outcomes from severe CDI.
