The incidence and height of antibody titers to colon, assayed by indirect 
hemagglutination with a heat stable colon extract from germ free rats, is 
significantly higher in sera from patients with ulcerative colitis than in those 
from healthy controls or from patients with amebic liver abscess or dysentery. 
While sera from ulcerative colitis patients and controls are indistinguishable 
in regard to incidence and height of antibody titers to Forsman antigen, 
Staphylococcus aureus S 209, Clostridium difficile, and several common strains 
of E. coli, they have elevated titers and increased incidence of antibodies to a 
heat stable antigen of E. coli O14. Patients with amebic dysentery have normal 
titers of such antibodies. Absorption of patients' sera with E. coli O14 antigen 
inhibits the colon directed hemagglutination reaction in approximately 30% of 
the cases tested. Likewise, the anti-E. coli O14 reaction can sometimes be 
inhibited with the colon extract. Other E. coli strains and other bacteria are 
inactive or have only weak inhibitory activity. Hemagglutination inhibition 
experiments show that germ free rat colon and E. coli O14 contain common 
structures, depicted by antibodies in the patients' sera. This pattern of 
reactivity closely resembles that seen in rats made autoimmune to colon by 
injection of newborn rabbit colon. E. coli O14 is known to carry a heterogenetic 
antigen present in lower concentration (or activity) in most Enterobacteriaceae. 
Hemagglutination inhibition experiments with rabbit antisera to E. coli O14 
suggest that the antigen common for E. coli O14 and colon is related to this 
heterogenetic antigen. The findings imply that this antigen, which is constantly 
present in low concentrations in the human colon, may give rise to anticolon 
antibody formation in ulcerative colitis through breakage of tolerance. Since 
this antigen is present in healthy individuals as well, additional factors are 
required to explain the induction of anti-colon autoimmunity in ulcerative 
colitis.
