We utilized clostridial toxins (with known specificities for inhibition of 
GTPases) to ascertain the contribution of candidate GTPases in physiologic 
insulin secretion from beta cells. Exposure of normal rat islets or isolated 
beta (HIT-T15) cells to Clostridium difficile toxins A and B catalyzed the 
glucosylation (and thereby the inactivation) of Rac, Cdc42, and Rho endogenous 
to beta cells; concomitantly, either toxin reduced glucose- or potassium-induced 
insulin secretion from rat islets and HIT cells. Treatment of beta cells with 
Clostridium sordellii lethal toxin (LT; which modified only Ras, Rap, and Rac) 
also reduced glucose- or potassium-induced secretion. However, clostridial toxin 
C3-exoenzyme (which ADP-ribosylates and inactivates only Rho) was without any 
effect on either glucose- or potassium-induced insulin secretion. These data 
suggest that Cdc42, Rac, Ras, and/or Rap (but not Rho) may be needed for 
glucose- or potassium-mediated secretion. The effects of these toxins appear to 
be specific on stimulus-secretion coupling, since no difference in metabolic 
viability (assessed colorimetrically by quantitating the conversion of the 
tetrazolium salt into a formazan in a reduction reaction driven by nutrient 
metabolism) was demonstrable between control and toxin (A or LT)-treated beta 
cells. Toxin (A or LT) treatment also did not alter glucose- or 
potassium-mediated rises in cytosolic free calcium concentrations ([Ca2+]i), 
suggesting that these GTPases are involved in steps distal to elevations in 
[Ca2+]i. Recent findings indicate that the carboxyl methylation of Cdc42 is 
stimulated by only glucose, whereas that of Rap (Kowluru et al., J Clin Invest 
98: 540-555, 1996) and Rac (present study) are regulated by glucose or 
potassium. Together, these findings provide direct evidence, for the first time, 
that the Rho subfamily of GTPases plays a key regulatory role(s) in insulin 
secretion, and they suggest that Cdc42 may be required for early steps in 
glucose stimulation of insulin release, whereas Rap and/or Rac may be required 
for a later step(s) in the stimulus-secretion coupling cascade (i.e. 
Ca2+-induced exocytosis of insulin).
