BACKGROUND: In attempts to elucidate factors stimulating bone resorption in 
patients with different inflammatory diseases in the vicinity of the skeleton, 
e.g., peridontal disease and rheumatoid arthritis, we are investigating the 
presence of bone-resorbing activity in a variety of inflammatory exudates. The 
aim of the present study was to characterize the bone-resorbing activity present 
in patients with periodontitis.
METHODS: Bone-resorbing activity was assessed in gingival crevicular fluids 
(GCFs) collected from patients with periodontitis and from patients with no 
signs of gingivitis. Bone-resorbing activity was evaluated by analyzing the 
capacity of GCFs to stimulate the release of minerals and the breakdown of bone 
matrix proteins in cultured neonatal mouse calvariae. The concentrations of 
IL-1alpha, IL-1beta and PGE2 were determined with ELISA and RIA techniques, 
respectively.
RESULTS: GCF eluates from 24 different healthy sites caused a 1.23+/-0.05 fold 
stimulation of 45Ca release, whereas GCF eluates from 45 different diseased 
(periodontitis) sites caused a 2.46+/-0.10 fold stimulation. The effect on 45Ca 
release was time- and concentration-dependent, inhibited by 3 different 
osteoclast inhibitors and associated with enhanced release of 3H from 
[3H]-proline-labelled bones. The activity in GCF causing enhanced 45Ca release 
was unaffected, or in some samples partially reduced, by ultrafiltration using a 
filter with a molecular weight cut-off of 3000 Daltons. The bone-resorbing 
activity was temperature sensitive (+90degrees C, 10 min). The concentrations of 
prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) in the diluted GCF eluates, used in the bone resorption 
bioassay, were too low to be responsible for the release of 45Ca. Antisera 
specifically neutralizing human IL-1a inhibited the stimulatory effect of GCF 
pooled from several diseased sites. The specific, recombinant human IL-1 
receptor antagonist completely inhibited the effect of pooled GCFs. GCF eluates 
from diseased sites contained human IL-1alpha and IL-1beta at concentrations of 
1838+/-294 pg/ml and 512+/-91 pg/ml, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: These data show that GCF contains activity(ies) stimulating 
osteoclastic bone resorption in vitro. The factor primarily responsible for this 
activity seems to be IL-1alpha, but IL-1alpha is not the sole activator of bone 
resorption in GCF.
