The side effects of indomethacin, such as ulceration of the kidney and central 
nervous system (CNS) toxicity, limit its use as a drug for rheumatoid arthritis. 
Encapsulation of this drug in liposomes may reduce the toxic effects. The aim of 
this study was to determine the factors influencing encapsulation of 
indomethacin in liposomes and to determine anti-inflammatory potential of 
liposomal indomethacin. A series of liposomal formulations of indomethacin were 
prepared using various phospholipids. The effects of method of preparation, 
lipid composition, charge, and cholesterol (CH) on encapsulation of indomethacin 
in liposomes were investigated. A significant variation in encapsulation of the 
drug in liposomes was observed when prepared by different methods. With all the 
methods of preparation tried, the favorable lipid composition for high 
encapsulation of this drug was egg phosphatidyl choline:CH: stearlyamine 
(PC:CH:SA) at a 1:0.5:0.1 molar ratio. Inclusion of cholesterol did not affect 
the encapsulation efficiency of the drug in liposomes. The drug release profile 
from the liposomes was biphasic, and the highest percentage drug release was 
observed with large unilamellar vesicles (LUVs) (100 nm). Inclusion of 
stearylamine (PC:CH:SA 1:0.5:0.1) and phosphatidyl glycerol (PG) (PC:CH:PG 
1:0.5:0.2) in the liposomes reduced the release of the drug in comparison to the 
neutral liposomes (PC:CH 1:1). The slow release of the drug from 
stearylamine-containing liposomes may be explained by the electrostatic 
interaction between the acid moiety of the drug and the amine moiety of the 
lipid. It is assumed that the possible hydrogen bonding between--OH groups of 
phosphatidyl glycerol and the--COOH group of the drug might be the reason for 
the slow release of the drug from PC:CH:PG (1:0.5:0.2) containing liposomes. 
Pharmacodynamic evaluation of the liposomes was performed by carrageenan-induced 
rat paw edema (acute) and adjuvant arthritis (chronic) models. The 
anti-inflammatory activity was increased from the first to fifth hour PC:CH:PG 
(1:0.5:0.2) and PC:CH:SA (1:0.5:0.1) liposomes showed the highest percentage 
inhibition of edema. In both these models, anti-inflammatory activity of 
liposomal indomethacin was significantly higher than that of free indomethacin 
(p < .01). The ulcer index of the free drug was about three times more than the 
encapsulated drug when administered at the same dose intraperitoneally to 
arthritic rats consecutively for 21 days.
