In spite of their adverse side effects, natural and synthetic glucocorticoids 
(GCs) occupy a unique role in several fields of medicine. They are potent 
regulators of bone cell growth and differentiation and the actions on the 
skeleton and related tissues depend on several factors including the dose, 
duration of the exposure, the steroid type and the species. In humans some of 
the effects are indirect, such as the regulation of intestinal calcium 
absorption and PTH secretion. Other effects are due to the cellular response 
that occurs within the bone microenvironment. It has been well established in in 
vitro studies that GCs can promote osteoblast differentiation from mesenchymal 
osteoprogenitors both in rat calvarial culture and in adherent marrow stromal 
cells. Moreover, GCs are able to enhance expression of the mature osteoblast 
phenotype, increasing mineralized nodules, osteocalcin secretion, and the bone 
morphogenetic protein-6 message level. However, the mechanisms by which GCs 
affect bone metabolism are still unclear. Recent studies with GCs on bone cells 
suggested that the production of cytokines and growth factors and the expression 
of their receptors may also be influenced by GCs. In fact, GCs are able to 
inhibit the synthesis of cytokines, such as interleukin-1 which stimulates bone 
remodeling by monocytes and macrophages. Moreover, osteoprotegerin, a recently 
cloned member of the tumor necrosis factor receptor family, is down-regulated by 
GCs, offering a possible interpretation for the induction of bone resorption by 
GCs. GC-induced inhibition of bone resorbing cytokines may contribute to explain 
the therapeutic actions of GCs in several diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis 
and myeloma. Furthermore, GCs modulate osteoclast recruitment, even if there is 
no clear explanation for a direct effect of GCs on osteoclastic precursors. 
Sustained stimulation of matrix degradation by isolated avian osteoclasts 
incubated with GCs has been reported, as well as cytotoxic effects on 
osteoclastic cells from neonatal rat long bones.
