OBJECTIVE: To determine the role of chondrocytes and factors released from 
chondrocytes in cartilage destruction by fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS) 
derived from patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
METHODS: RA FLS from 2 patients were implanted into SCID mice, together with 
fresh articular cartilage or with cartilage that had been stored for 24 hours at 
4 degrees C or at 37 degrees C. The invasion of the same RA FLS into the fresh 
and stored cartilage was compared histologically using a semiquantitative 
scoring system. In addition, we investigated whether protein synthesis in 
chondrocytes affects the invasion of RA FLS in vitro. A 3-dimensional 
cartilage-like matrix formed by cultured chondrocytes was labeled with 35S. 
After formation of the cartilage-like matrix, protein synthesis was blocked with 
cycloheximide. The invasion of RA FLS from 6 patients into cycloheximide-treated 
and untreated matrix was assessed by measuring the released radioactivity in 
coculture with and without interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta) and tumor necrosis 
factor alpha (TNFalpha).
RESULTS: The SCID mouse experiments showed a significant invasion of RA FLS into 
the cartilage (overall mean score 3.2) but revealed significant differences when 
the invasion of the same RA FLS into fresh and stored cartilage was compared. RA 
FLS that were implanted with fresh articular cartilage showed a significantly 
higher invasiveness than those implanted with pieces of cartilage that had been 
stored for 24 hours (overall mean score 2.3). Storage at 37 degrees C and 4 
degrees C resulted in the same reduction of invasion (35% and 37%, 
respectively). In the in vitro experiments, RA FLS rapidly destroyed the 
cartilage-like matrix. Blocking of chondrocyte protein biosynthesis 
significantly decreased the invasion of RA FLS, as shown by a decreased release 
of radioactivity. Addition of IL-1beta, but not TNFalpha, to the cocultures 
partially restored the invasiveness of RA FLS.
CONCLUSION: These data underline the value of the SCID mouse in vivo model of 
rheumatoid cartilage destruction and demonstrate that chondrocytes contribute 
significantly to the degradation of cartilage by releasing factors that 
stimulate RA FLS. Among those, IL-1beta-mediated mechanisms might be of 
particular importance.
