OBJECTIVE: To assess the capacity of interleukin-4 (IL-4) and IL-10 to block 
polymorphonuclear neutrophil (PMN) activation in an ex vivo human model system, 
and to confirm their effect on neutrophil function in an animal model of 
arthritis.
METHODS: The ex vivo phagocytic capacity of cytokine-activated human PMNs was 
assessed by use of assays for measuring the ingestion of heat-killed yeast and 
by subsequent hexose-monophosphate shunt activation using nitroblue tetrazolium 
reduction. The in vivo activity of IL-4 and IL-10 was measured using a rat 
adjuvant arthritis model in which the mycobacterial antigen concentration was 
titrated to modify disease intensity.
RESULTS: IL-4 and IL-10 suppressed the ex vivo activation state of 
interferon-gamma- and tumor necrosis factor alpha-activated human neutrophils. 
In the rat adjuvant arthritis model, treatment with systemic murine IL-10 
(mIL-10) effectively suppressed all disease parameters in rats that received the 
lower concentrations of mycobacteria, whereas systemic mIL-4 was effective 
against even the most severe disease. Both cytokines were effective in lowering 
the absolute PMN cell number recovered and the PMN activation state in the joint 
synovia. We also observed lower levels of the messenger RNA transcript for CINC 
protein (cytokine-induced neutrophil chemoattractant; a rat homolog for human 
IL-8) in the synovia.
CONCLUSION: IL-10 is an effective antiarthritic agent and has a major effect on 
the presence and function of PMNs in the joint synovia when disease intensity is 
not severe. IL-4 has an inhibitory profile that is similar to that of IL-10, but 
is effective in modifying even the most severe disease. Both cytokines reduced 
the phagocytic activation of human PMNs in response to proinflammatory 
cytokines. These data demonstrate that IL-4 and IL-10 can exert powerful 
regulatory effects on neutrophil function that translate into a therapeutic 
response in a disease model of arthritis. Treatment with these cytokines alone 
or in combination may therefore be very useful in the management of patients 
with rheumatoid arthritis.
