AIMS: PTEN is a novel tumour suppressor which exhibits tyrosine phosphatase 
activity as well as homology to the cytoskeletal proteins tensin and auxilin. 
Mutations of PTEN have been described in several human cancers and associated 
their invasiveness and metastatic properties. Although not malignant, rheumatoid 
arthritis synovial fibroblasts (RA-SF) exhibit certain tumour-like features such 
as attachment to cartilage and invasive growth. In the present study, we 
analyzed whether mutant transcripts of PTEN were present in RA-SF. In addition, 
we used in situ hybridization to study the expression of PTEN messenger (m)RNA 
in tissue samples of RA and normal individuals as well as in cultured RA-SF and 
in the severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) mouse model of RA. Synovial 
tissue specimens were obtained from seven patients with RA and from two 
nonarthritic individuals. Total RNA was isolated from synovial fibroblasts and 
after first strand complementary (c)DNA synthesis, polymerase chain reaction 
(PCR) was performed to amplify a 1063 base pair PTEN fragment that encompassed 
the coding sequence of PTEN including the phosphatase domain and all mutation 
sites described so far. The PCR products were subcloned in Escherichia coli, and 
up to four clones were picked from each plate for automated sequencing. For in 
situ hybridization, digoxigenin-labelled PTEN-specific RNA probes were generated 
by in vitro transcription. For control in situ hybridization, a matrix 
metalloproteinase (MMP)-2-specific probe was prepared. To investigate the 
expression of PTEN in the absence of human macrophage or lymphocyte derived 
factors, we implanted RA-SF from three patients together with normal human 
cartilage under the renal capsule of SCID mice. After 60 days, mice were 
sacrificed, the implants removed and embedded into paraffin.
RESULTS: PCR revealed the presence of the expected 1063 base pair PTEN fragment 
in all (9/9) cell cultures (Fig.1). No additional bands that could account for 
mutant PTEN variants were detected. Sequence analysis revealed 100% homology of 
all RA-derived PTEN fragments to those from normal SF as well as to the 
published GenBank sequence (accession number U93051). However, in situ 
hybridization demonstrated considerable differences in the expression of PTEN 
mRNA within the lining and the sublining layers of RA synovial membranes. As 
shown in Figure 2a, no staining was observed within the lining layer which has 
been demonstrated to mediate degradation of cartilage and bone in RA. In 
contrast, abundant expression of PTEN mRNA was found in the sublining of all RA 
synovial tissues (Figs 2a and b). Normal synovial specimens showed homogeneous 
staining fo PTEN within the thin synovial membrane (Fig. 2c). In situ 
hybridization using the sense probe gave no specific staining (Fig. 2d). We also 
performed in situ hybridization on four of the seven cultured RA-SF and followed 
one cell line from the first to the sixth passage. Interestingly, only 40% of 
cultured RA-SF expressed PTEN mRNA (Fig. 3A), and the proportion of PTEN 
expressing cells did not change throughout the passages. In contrast, control 
experiments using a specific RNA probe fo MMP-2 revealed mRNA expression by 
nearly all cultured cells (Fig. 3B). As seen before, implantation of RA-SF into 
the SCID mice showed considerable cartilage degradation. Interestingly, only 
negligible PTEN expression was found in those RA-SF aggressively invading the 
cartilage (Fig. 3c). In situ hybridization for MMP-2 showed abundant staining in 
these cells (Fig. 3d).
DISCUSSION: Although this study found no evidence for mutations of PTEN in RA 
synovium, the observation that PTEN expression is lacking in the lining layer of 
RA synovium as well as in more that half of cultured RA-SF is of interest. It 
suggests that loss of PTEN function may not exclusively be caused by genetic 
alterations, yet at the same time links the low expression of PTEN to a 
phenotype of cells that have been shown to invade cartilage aggressively. It has 
been proposed that the tyrosine phosphatase activity of counteracting th actions 
o protein tyrosine kinases. As some studies have demonstrated an upregulation of 
tyrosine kinase activity in RA synovial cells, it might be speculated that the 
lack of PTEN expression in aggressive RA-SF contributes to the imbalance of 
tyrosine kinases and phosphatases in this disease. However, the extensive 
amino-terminal homology of the predicted protein to the cytoskeletal proteins 
tensin and auxilin suggests a complex regulatory function involving cellular 
adhesion molecules and phosphatase-mediated signalling. The tyrosine phosphatase 
TEP1 has been shown to be identical to the protein encoded by PTEN, and gene 
transcription of TEP1 has been demonstrated to be downregulated by transforming 
growth factor (TGF)-beta. Therefore, it could be hypothesized that TGF-beta 
might be responsible for the downregulation of PTEN. Low expression of PTEN may 
belong to the features that distinguish between the activated phenotype of RA-SF 
and the sublining, proliferating but nondestructive cells.
