Complete understanding of the physiology and pathology of the cartilage is 
essential to establish treatments for a variety of cartilage disorders and 
defects such as rheumatoid arthritis, congenital malformations, and tumors of 
cartilage. Although synthetic materials have been used in many cases, they 
possess inherent problems including wear of the materials and low mechanical 
strength. Autograft has been considered very effective to overcome these 
problems. However, the limitation of the transplant volume is a major problem in 
autograft to be overcome. The costal cartilage is the most serious candidate for 
donor site transplantation, since it is the largest permanent hyaline cartilage 
in the body. To investigate the possibility using the costal cartilage as a 
transplant source, we have established and characterized three mouse chondrocyte 
cell lines (MCC-2, MCC-5, and MCC-35) derived from the costal cartilage of 
8-week-old male SV40 large T-antigen transgenic mice. At confluence, all the 
cell lines formed nodules that could be positively stained with alcian blue (pH 
2.5). The size of nodules gradually increased during culturing time. After 2 and 
6 weeks of culture, RT-PCR analysis demonstrated that all three cell lines 
expressed mRNA from the cartilage-specific genes for type II collagen, type XI 
collagen, aggrecan, and link protein. Furthermore, type X collagen expression 
was detected in MCC-5 and MCC-35 but not in MCC-2. Any phenotypic changes were 
not observed over 31 cell divisions. Immunocytochemistry showed further that 
MCC-2, MCC-5, and MCC-35 produced cartilage-specific proteins type II collagen 
and type XI collagen, while in addition MCC-5 and MCC-35 produced type X 
collagen. Treatment with 1alpha, 25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3) inhibited cell 
proliferation and differentiation of the three cell lines in a dose-dependent 
manner. These phenotypic characteristics have been found consistent with 
chondrocyte cell lines established from cartilage tissues other than costal 
cartilage. In conclusion, costal cartilage shows phenotypic similarities to 
other cartilages, i.e., articular cartilage and embryonic limbs, suggesting that 
costal cartilage may be very useful as the donor transplantation site for the 
treatment of cartilage disorders. Furthermore, the cell lines established in 
this study are also beneficial in basic research of cartilage physiology and 
pathology.
