OBJECTIVE: Various extracts of the Chinese herbal remedy Tripterygium wilfordii 
Hook. f. (TWHF) have been reported to be therapeutically efficacious in 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in China, but their mechanism of action remains 
unclear. We investigated the effect of triptolide, a diterpenoid triepoxide from 
TWHF, on the production of pro-matrix metalloproteinase 1 (proMMP-1; or 
procollagenase 1 or pro-interstitial collagenase 1), proMMP-3 (or prostromelysin 
1), tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs), and proinflammatory 
cytokines in human synovial fibroblasts and J774A.1 mouse macrophages.
METHODS: Human synovial fibroblasts and mouse macrophages were cultured with 
interleukin-1alpha (IL-1alpha) or lipopolysaccharide (LPS) in the presence or 
absence of triptolide. The production of proMMPs 1 and 3, TIMPs 1 and 2, 
cyclooxygenase 1 (COX-1) and COX-2, prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), IL-1beta, and IL-6 
was assayed by Western blot analysis and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Gene 
expression of proMMPs 1 and 3, TIMPs 1 and 2, COX-1 and COX-2, IL-1alpha, 
IL-1beta, tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha), and IL-6 was also monitored by 
Northern blot analysis and reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: Triptolide suppressed the IL-1alpha-induced production of proMMPs 1 and 
3 and decreased their messenger RNA levels in human synovial fibroblasts. In 
contrast, the IL-1alpha-induced gene expression and production of TIMPs 1 and 2 
were further augmented by triptolide in the synovial cells. Triptolide also 
inhibited the IL-1alpha-induced production of PGE2 by selectively suppressing 
the gene expression and production of COX-2, but not those of COX-1. In 
addition, triptolide suppressed the LPS-induced production of PGE2 in mouse 
macrophages. Furthermore, the gene expression of IL-1alpha, IL-1beta, TNFalpha, 
and IL-6, as well as the production of IL-1beta and IL-6, were inhibited by 
triptolide in the LPS-treated mouse macrophages.
CONCLUSION: We have demonstrated for the first time that the therapeutic effects 
of TWHF in RA are due in part to the novel chondroprotective effect of 
triptolide via the direct suppression of the production of proMMPs 1 and 3 and 
the simultaneous up-regulation of TIMPs in IL-1-treated synovial fibroblasts. 
Triptolide's interference with gene expression of proinflammatory cytokines and 
its known inhibitory effects on PGE2 production are also probably very 
effective.
