The present report describes and expands the clinical and genetic spectrum of 
the autoinflammatory disorder, tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor-associated 
periodic syndrome (TRAPS). A total of 20 mutations have been identified since 
our initial discovery of 6 missense mutations in TNF receptor super family 1A 
(TNFRSF1A) in 1999. Eighteen of the mutations result in amino acid substitutions 
within the first 2 cysteine-rich domains (CRDs) of the extracellular portion of 
the receptor. A single splicing mutation also affects the first CRD by causing 
the insertion of 4 amino acids. Haplotype analysis of the most commonly 
occurring and ethnically heterogeneous mutation, R92Q, demonstrates an ancient 
founder; however, analysis of the T50M mutation, another commonly occurring 
mutation in Irish and Scottish families, does not, suggesting that T50M is a 
recurring mutation. Mutations that result in cysteine substitutions demonstrate 
a higher penetrance of the clinical phenotype (93% versus 82% for noncysteine 
residue substitutions), and also increase the probability of developing 
life-threatening amyloidosis (24% versus 2% for noncysteine residue 
substitutions). Retrospective and prospective evaluation of more than 50 
patients, representing 10 of the 20 known mutations, allows us to expand and 
better define the clinical spectrum of TRAPS. Recurrent episodes of fever, 
myalgia, rash, abdominal pain, and conjunctivitis that often last longer than 5 
days are the most characteristic clinical features of TRAPS. Defective shedding 
of TNFRSF1A can only partially explain the pathophysiologic mechanism of TRAPS, 
since some mutations have normal shedding. Consequently, other mechanisms may be 
mediating the observed phenotype. We are currently investigating other possible 
mechanisms using stable and transiently transfected cell systems in vitro, as 
well as developing a knockin mouse model. Preliminary data suggest that 
etanercept may be effective in decreasing the severity, duration, and frequency 
of symptoms in TRAPS patients. Additionally, it provides a viable therapeutic 
alternative to glucocorticoid therapy, which has numerous serious, long-term 
adverse effects. Two clinical trials are being conducted to evaluate the 
efficacy of etanercept in decreasing the frequency and severity of symptoms in 
TRAPS. Lastly, we have summarized data that R92Q and P46L, and probably as yet 
undiscovered substitutions, represent very low penetrance mutations that may 
play a much larger role in more broadly defined inflammatory diseases such as 
rheumatoid arthritis. Our laboratories are currently undertaking both clinical 
and basic research studies to define the role of these mutations in more common 
inflammatory diseases.
