Reactive oxygen species (ROS) have been implicated in the pathogenesis of 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA), while antioxidant enzymes, such as extracellular 
superoxide dismutase (EC-SOD) and catalase, block radical-induced events. The 
present study tested if the ex vivo transfer of EC-SOD and catalase genes alone 
or in combination in the knee joint of rats with monoarticular antigen-induced 
arthritis (AIA) was anti-inflammatory, and examined the potential mechanisms 
involved. Synoviocytes isolated from female Wistar rats were immortalized with a 
retroviral vector SUV19.5. These cells were permanently transfected with an 
EC-SOD expression plasmid (pEC-SODZeo) or a catalase expression plasmid 
(pCatalaseZeo) to create cells overexpressing EC-SOD or catalase, as measured by 
RT-PCR and Western blots. The cells were engrafted in knee joints of animals at 
the time of the induction of AIA. Three gene transfer groups, an EC-SOD group, a 
catalase group and a combined therapy group (EC-SOD and catalase) were included 
in these experiments. Animals in the control group were engrafted with 
synoviocytes transfected with the plasmid pZeoSV2 without an insert. Clinical 
and histological assessments were performed, as well as tissue measurements of 
SOD, catalase and gelatinase activities. Ex vivo gene transfer of EC-SOD and 
catalase into rat knee joints produced about a six- to seven-fold increase in 
EC-SOD activity and a two- to three-fold increase in catalase activity compared 
with the control animals. Rats treated with cells overexpressing EC-SOD, 
catalase or a combination of EC-SOD and catalase showed significant suppression 
of knee joint swelling, decreased infiltration of inflammatory cells within the 
synovial membrane and reduced gelatinase activity in knee joints, compared with 
animals receiving cells transfected with the plasmid alone. No statistically 
significant difference was found between the groups treated with cells 
overexpressing EC-SOD, catalase or a combination of both. Gene therapy involving 
the local intra-articular overexpression of two antioxidant enzymes, EC-SOD and 
catalase, was anti-inflammatory in AIA. One mechanism appears to be the 
suppression of gelatinase activities by both EC-SOD and catalase.
