OBJECTIVE: To characterize the morphologic and immunologic features of adherent 
synovial fluid cells derived from patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA), and 
to explore their potential function in vitro and in vivo by focusing on 
cartilage destruction.
METHODS: Synovial fluid adherent cells obtained from patients with RA and from 
control subjects were characterized by immunohistochemistry, flow cytometry, and 
electron microscopy. In vitro, these cells were cultured in the presence of 
cartilage particles. Cartilage destruction was monitored by the release of 
sulfated glycosaminoglycans (sGAG) into the medium, and the level of matrix 
metalloproteinase 1 (MMP-1) in the cell culture supernatant was measured by 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. To inhibit cartilage destruction in vitro, 
the MMP inhibitor marimastat was tested in this system. In vivo, in the SCID 
mouse coimplantation model, RA synovial fluid adherent cells and RA synovial 
fibroblasts (as positive controls) were coimplanted with human cartilage under 
the kidney capsule and maintained there for 60 days.
RESULTS: In vitro, the synovial fluid adherent cells consisted of 2 
subpopulations, large round-shaped macrophage-like cells (CD68+) and 
spindle-shaped fibroblast-like cells (Thy-1+). When passaged, the latter cells 
proliferated and organized themselves into 3-dimensional formations. This 
allowed them to reach collagen particles fixed with agarose. Fibroblasts derived 
from synovial tissues could not be used in this assay because they grew only in 
monolayers and not on agarose. The majority (>90%) of passaged RA synovial fluid 
adherent cells expressed the Thy-1+,CD45-,CD68-,CD86- phenotype. Electron 
microscopy did not reveal important morphologic differences between the 2 types 
of fibroblasts, those from synovial tissue or those from synovial fluid. 
However, synovial fluid adherent cells expressed lower levels of adhesion 
molecules, including CD54 and galectin 3, as well as the complement-regulatory 
molecule CD55. The in vitro release of sGAG associated with cell activity was 
2.5-fold higher from RA synovial fluid adherent cells in comparison with that 
from negative control cells. The release of sGAG correlated with the 
concentration of MMP-1 and was inhibited by the broad-range MMP inhibitor 
marimastat in a dose-dependent manner. RA synovial fluid adherent cells 
coimplanted with cartilage in SCID mice showed the same invasive behavior as 
that displayed by tissue-derived RA synovial fibroblasts.
CONCLUSION: Similar to tissue-derived RA synovial fibroblasts, RA synovial fluid 
adherent cells, which contain "floating" anchorage-independent fibroblast-like 
cells, mediate cartilage destruction independent of the hyperplastic synovial 
tissue.
