The hallmark of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is progressive destruction of the 
joints, preceded and accompanied by synovial hyperplasia and chronic 
inflammation. Spontaneous and induced animal models of RA reflect predominantly 
the inflammatory aspects of the disease. To reproduce the destruction of 
cartilage and bone mediated by an activated synovium, it was desirable to 
develop models that allow the dissection of cellular and molecular components 
derived from human tissue. The SCID mouse co-implantation model of human RA 
focuses on RA synovial fibroblasts (RA-SF) and their role in cartilage 
destruction. The model has provided the best evidence that RA-SF contribute 
significantly to matrix degradation, even in the absence of human lymphocytes 
and macrophages, since highly purified RA-SF invade the co-implanted normal 
human cartilage. Moreover, it became clear that they maintained their aggressive 
phenotype over long periods of time, particularly at sites of invasion into the 
co-implanted human cartilage. Targeting different signaling molecules, cytokines 
and matrix-degrading enzymes by soluble receptors, antagonists or negative 
mutants in the SCID mouse model of RA has implicated many of them in the 
mechanisms leading to cartilage destruction. However, since inhibition of a 
single molecule or pathway is not sufficient to inhibit the aggressive behavior 
of RA-SF it appears necessary to co-express in the synoviocytes genes for two or 
even more antagonists of e.g. cytokines, matrix-degrading enzymes or molecules 
interfering specifically with signaling pathways involved in the apoptosis of 
RA-SF. Based on the recent observation that the L1 (line-1) endogenous 
retroviral element appears responsible for the cytokine- independent activation 
via the MAPK p38delta, the current understanding of disease pathogenesis 
suggests that both the cytokine-dependent as well as the cytokine-independent 
pathways of joint destruction must be inhibited. Modulation of both pathways by 
gene transfer approaches in the SCID mouse model is a feasible method aimed at 
identifying novel targets for the prevention of cartilage destruction in RA.
