OBJECTIVE: Nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-kappaB) is a critical transcription factor 
governing the expression of many cytokines that are involved in the pathogenesis 
of inflammatory diseases, such as asthma and rheumatoid arthritis. Melatonin 
(MT), a relatively safe and potent antioxidant which has shown efficacy in 
several chronic inflammatory models, may inhibit the expression of NF-kappaB and 
therefore might have a therapeutic use in asthma. This study aimed at observing 
the effect of MT on the expression of NF-kappaB and airway inflammation in a rat 
model of bronchial asthma.
METHODS: Twenty-four male Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats weighing 120 g to 170 g were 
randomly divided into three experimental groups (8 in each): (1) Asthmatic 
group: Rats were immunized on day 1 by intraperitoneal injection of 100 mg 
ovalbumin (OVA) in 1 ml of saline with 100 mg of alu minum hydroxide. From day 
15 the animals were challenged with aerosolized OVA (1% in saline) for 20 
minutes per day for 7 consecutive days. (2) MT group: OVA-sensitized rats were 
injected intraperitoneally with 10 mg/kg MT 30 minutes before each OVA 
challenge. (3) CONTROL GROUP: OVA for inhalation and MT for intraperitoneal 
injection was replaced with normal saline (NS). Airway responsiveness to 
aerosolized acetylcholine of 24 rats was detected six hours after the last 
challenge. Then the rats were lavaged and total and differentiated leukocytes 
counts in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) were performed after staining with 
Wright-Giemsa staining. At the same time, levels of nitric oxide (NO) in BALF, 
inducible nitric oxide synthesis (iNOS) and constitute nitric oxide synthesis 
(cNOS) in the lung tissues were assessed with the use of nitrate reductase and 
chemical colorimetry, respectively. The expression of NF-kappaB in the lung 
tissues was observed by means of immunohistochemical staining.
RESULTS: (1) After OVA challenge, there was a significant decrease in airway 
responsiveness, lymphocytes and eosinophils in BALF in MT group compared with 
asthmatic group (P < 0.01 respectively); (2) There was a significant decrease in 
amounts of NO(2)(-)/NO(3)(-) in the BALF and levels of iNOS in the lung tissues 
in MT group comparing with asthmatic group (P < 0.01 respectively); and the 
levels of iNOS in the lung tissues was correlated positively with 
NO(2)(-)/NO(3)(-) in the BALF (P < 0.01), but there were no significant 
differences in activity of cNOS in any of the groups analyzed. (3) There was a 
significant increase in expression of NF-kappaB in lung tissues in asthmatic 
group compared with the other groups (P < 0.01), and so was in MT group compared 
with control group (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: MT could partially inhibit the expression of NF-kappaB and 
down-regulate the activity of iNOS in lung tissue, decrease the production of NO 
in BALF. These data suggest that the inhibitory effect of MT probably play a 
role in decreasing airway hyperresponsiveness and airway inflammation of 
asthmatic rats model.
