PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Trials treating human rheumatic diseases with biologic agents 
and drugs that selectively affect B cells will be reviewed. Rituximab, an 
anti-CD20 monoclonal mouse/human antibody, will be the primary focus of the 
review because it has been widely used in several autoimmune and rheumatic 
conditions, but the limited studies on other reagents such as anti-BlyS, 
anti-CD154, and B cell tolerogens will also be covered.
RECENT FINDINGS: The single most important recent development was the completion 
of a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of rituximab in 
methotrexate-resistant rheumatoid arthritis. In this trial, B cell depletion 
with rituximab led to a sustained clinical response with an impressive 
improvement in America College of Rheumatology 50% response (ACR 50) at both 24 
and 48 weeks. Additional open studies of rituximab showing clinical benefit in 
systemic lupus erythematosus, cryoglobulinemia, antineutrophil cytoplasmic 
antibodies+ vasculitis, and dermatomyositis are noteworthy but must be 
interpreted with caution until randomized control trials are available. Two 
well-designed studies of anti-CD154 antibodies in systemic lupus erythematosus 
were reported. Unfortunately, one was halted because of unexpected vascular 
complications, and the other failed to show any beneficial clinical effect. A 
phase I study using anti-BlyS in SLE demonstrated a selective effect on B cells 
and no overt toxicity, but in this very short-term study no effect on serology 
or clinical activity was seen. Two B cell tolerogens have been used in human 
trials. The first tolerogen, directed at anti-dsDNA responses in SLE, did 
significantly decrease titers of high-affinity anti-dsDNA antibodies but had no 
clinically beneficial effect overall. A phase I trial of a tolerogen directed at 
anti-beta2-glycoprotein I antibodies demonstrated a decrease in antibody titers 
after a single injection.
SUMMARY: Several therapeutic agents targeting B cells have now been tested or 
are being tested in human trials. The success of rituximab in a well-controlled 
trial confirms previous preliminary reports indicating that B cell depletion can 
treat established autoimmune disease.
