The present study was undertaken to examine whether ribozymes cleaving 
specifically cathepsin L (CL) mRNA are able to decrease the synthesis of CL 
protease in rheumatoid arthritis synovial fibroblasts (RA-SF) and thereby reduce 
the invasiveness into cartilage both in vitro and in the SCID mouse 
coimplantation model of RA. Two different ribozymes that cleave CL mRNA 
specifically at positions 533 (RzCL533) and 790 (RzCL790) were generated. Using 
retroviral gene transfer, RA-SF were transduced with the ribozyme constructs or 
the empty vector. To examine the effect of the ribozymes on the mRNA level, 
quantitative analysis for CL mRNA was performed using real-time PCR. For 
evaluation on the protein level, ELISA using specific anti-CL antibodies was 
performed. In addition, transduced RA-SF were examined in vitro in a 
three-dimensional destruction assay evaluating their ability to degrade 
extracellular matrix produced by human chondrocytes. Matrix destruction was 
monitored by the release of soluble glycosaminoglycans (sGAG). Using the in vivo 
SCID mouse coimplantation model of RA, RzCL533-transduced RA-SF and control 
cells were coimplanted with human cartilage for 60 days. After being killed, 
invasion of RA-SF into the cartilage was evaluated by using a semiquantitative 
score. Transduction of RA-SF with RzCL533 and RzCL790 ribozymes decreased 
significantly the expression of CL mRNA to 44% (range 25-62%) and 20% (range 
1-43%), respectively, when compared to mock-transduced cells. The protein 
concentration of CL in the cell culture supernatants of transduced RA-SF was 
decreased from 16.0 ng/ml in the mock constructs to 4.1 and 8.2 ng/ml (mean), 
respectively. Using the in vitro cartilage destruction assay, the release of 
sGAG decreased to 46 and 60%, respectively, after 14 days when compared to 
mock-transduced cells. In the SCID mouse coimplantation model of RA, 
RzCL533-transduced RA-SF revealed a significant lower cartilage invasion when 
compared to mock and untransduced cells. Using retroviral gene transfer, 
ribozymes cleaving CL mRNA inhibit specifically the synthesis of this 
matrix-degrading enzyme and reduce cartilage destruction in in vitro and in vivo 
models. Our study therefore suggests that ribozymes targeting CL could be a 
novel and efficient tool to inhibit joint destruction in RA.
