The effect of water extract of deer antler aqua-acupuncture (DAA; Cervi 
Pantotrichum Cornu) prepared from the pilose antler of Cervus korean TEMMINCK 
var. mantchuricus Swinhoe (Nokyong in Korean), a traditional immunosuppressive 
and immunoactivating Korean herbal acupuncture [Int. Immunopharm. 3 7 (2003) 
1001] on rat chondrocyte apoptosis was studied. Terminally differentiated 
hypertrophic chondrocytes were isolated from rat costochondrial cartilage and 
cell death was measured in the presence of 3-5 mM phosphate ions (Pi). The 
effect of 10 microg/ml DAA was compared to that of phosphonoformic acid (PFA), a 
competitive inhibitor of the Na-Pi co-transport on Pi-induced apoptosis in 
chondrocytes. A total of 1 mM PFA blocked anion-induced cell death and prevented 
an increase in the cell Pi content. In a parallel study, we determined that the 
DAA also protected chondrocytes from death. On the other hand, the effect of DAA 
was also evaluated as an inhibitor of dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (DHO-DHase) 
and tested in the rat collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) model. Female 7-week-old 
Sprague-Dawley rats were used for the evaluation of DAA in the CIA model. 
Arthritis was evaluated by arthritis score, body weight loss, bone destruction 
score. DAA was administered by bilateral Shinsu (B23) acupuncture five times per 
week (10, 20, 30, and 100 microg/kg/day). DAA inhibited rat liver DHO-DHase in 
vitro with Ki = 843 +/- 43 microg/ml. The anti-proliferative effect of DAA was 
caused by cell cycle arrest at the S-phase. Treatment with 300 mg/kg/day of DAA 
completely prevented the development of CIA based on the reduction of the 
arthritis score. The 50% effective dose (ED50) of DAA on arthritis score was 64 
mg/kg. DAA ameliorated body weight loss associated with disease onset. DAA 
suppressed the development of arthritis, even when it was administered after a 
booster immunization of collagen. DAA is a novel immunosuppressant which 
inhibits DHO-DHase and its effects in CIA suggest that it could be useful in the 
treatment of rheumatoid arthritis.
