Experimental arthritis models are considered valuable tools for delineating 
mechanisms of inflammation and autoimmune phenomena. Use of microarray-based 
methods represents a new and challenging approach that allows molecular 
dissection of complex autoimmune diseases such as arthritis. In order to 
characterize the temporal gene expression profile in joints from the 
reactivation model of streptococcal cell wall (SCW)-induced arthritis in Lewis 
(LEW/N) rats, total RNA was extracted from ankle joints from naive, SCW 
injected, or phosphate buffered saline injected animals (time course study) and 
gene expression was analyzed using Affymetrix oligonucleotide microarray 
technology (RAE230A). After normalization and statistical analysis of data, 631 
differentially expressed genes were sorted into clusters based on their levels 
and kinetics of expression using Spotfire profile search and K-mean cluster 
analysis. Microarray-based data for a subset of genes were validated using 
real-time PCR TaqMan analysis. Analysis of the microarray data identified 631 
genes (441 upregulated and 190 downregulated) that were differentially expressed 
(Delta > 1.8, P < 0.01), showing specific levels and patterns of gene 
expression. The genes exhibiting the highest fold increase in expression on days 
-13.8, -13, or 3 were involved in chemotaxis, inflammatory response, cell 
adhesion and extracellular matrix remodelling. Transcriptome analysis identified 
10 upregulated genes (Delta > 5), which have not previously been associated with 
arthritis pathology and are located in genomic regions associated with 
autoimmune disease. The majority of the downregulated genes were associated with 
metabolism, transport and regulation of muscle development. In conclusion, the 
present study describes the temporal expression of multiple disease-associated 
genes with potential pathophysiological roles in the reactivation model of 
SCW-induced arthritis in Lewis (LEW/N) rat. These findings improve our 
understanding of the molecular events that underlie the pathology in this animal 
model, which is potentially a valuable comparator to human rheumatoid arthritis 
(RA).
