OBJECTIVE: To construct rats congenic for the chromosome 2 arthritis-regulatory 
quantitative trait locus Cia10, originally identified in a (DA x ACI)F(2) 
intercross rat strain that had been assessed for collagen-induced arthritis 
(CIA), and to determine the effect of this congenic interval on arthritis 
severity, joint histologic structure, and cytokine transcription in rats with 
pristane-induced arthritis (PIA).
METHODS: A 52.6-MB interval derived from the ACI (CIA- and PIA-resistant) strain 
and containing the Cia10 interval was introgressed into the DA 
(arthritis-susceptible) background through genotype-guided congenic breeding. 
Homozygous male and female DA.ACI(Cia10) congenic rats were studied for their 
susceptibility to and severity of PIA, and were compared with same-sex DA rats. 
Histologic analyses were done on hind paws collected on day 32 following the 
pristane injection. Levels of interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta) and tumor necrosis 
factor alpha (TNFalpha) messenger RNA (mRNA) were measured with real-time 
polymerase chain reaction on synovial tissues from day-32 ankles.
RESULTS: Both male and female DA.ACI(Cia10) congenic rats developed a 
significantly milder form of arthritis, with a 95% and 92% reduction in the 
arthritis severity index compared with DA male and female controls, respectively 
(males P < or = 0.001 and females P = 0.003). DA.ACI(Cia10) congenic rat 
synovial tissue was more likely to preserve its normal histologic architecture, 
including minimal to no cartilage and bone erosions, synovial hyperplasia, and 
pannus formation, and reduced numbers of vessels (angiogenesis), when compared 
with DA synovial tissue. There was a 2.7- and 2.4-fold reduction in the amount 
of IL-1beta and TNFalpha mRNA, respectively, in the synovial tissue of 
DA.ACI(Cia10) congenic rats compared with DA rats. Sequencing analyses of 
complementary DNA for the Cia10-predicted candidate gene Ptpn8, the rat homolog 
of the rheumatoid arthritis (RA)-susceptibility gene PTPN22, revealed no 
polymorphisms between the DA and ACI strains.
CONCLUSION: This study determined that Cia10 harbors a major autoimmune 
arthritis-regulatory gene. This gene regulates clinical disease severity, 
histologic damage, and the levels of at least two central proinflammatory 
cytokines. We are in the process of narrowing down the critical region for 
positional cloning of the Cia10 gene. The identification of this gene will 
provide novel targets or pathways for focused candidate-gene studies in RA.
