OBJECTIVE: Glucocorticoids are widely used for the management of rheumatoid 
arthritis. Osteoporosis is a major side effect of glucocorticoid therapy and is 
attributable to inhibition of bone formation. We developed an osteoblast culture 
system in which glucocorticoids strongly inhibit development of the osteoblast 
phenotype, including expression of the bone-specific osteocalcin (OC) gene. 
Using this gene as a model, the goal of this study was to discover 
glucocorticoid-sensitive transcriptional mechanisms in osteoblasts.
METHODS: Dexamethasone (DEX; 1 microM) was administered to murine MC3T3-E1 
osteoblastic cultures under conditions that inhibit mineralized extracellular 
matrix formation and OC messenger RNA levels by >10-fold. Because standard 
(short-term) transient transfection assays with OC promoter-reporter constructs 
did not recapitulate the strong DEX-mediated repression, mapping of OC negative 
glucocorticoid response elements (GREs) was performed initially by stable 
transfection and then with long-term transient transfection assays. 
Transcription factor binding to the OC negative GRE was studied by 
electrophoretic mobility shift assays.
RESULTS: Several-fold repression of OC-luciferase constructs was recapitulated 
in stable and long-term transient transfection assays, in which the transfected 
cells were allowed to progress to a sufficiently advanced developmental stage. 
Analysis of a 5' promoter deletion series mapped an OC negative GRE to a 15-bp 
G/C-rich motif (-161/-147) located just upstream of the binding site for the 
osteoblast master transcription factor Runx2. Oligonucleotides encompassing this 
element and MC3T3-E1 cell extracts formed a protein-DNA complex that contained 
an Egr/Krox family member(s). Complex formation was competed by either an 
oligonucleotide containing 2 consensus Egr motifs or by anti-Egr2/Krox20 
antibodies. Three copies of this Krox-binding element conferred 20-fold 
transcriptional activation on the 147-bp basal OC promoter in osteoblasts, and 
the enhancer activity was inhibited by DEX. Enhancer activity was not observed 
in 10T1/2 fibroblasts unless these cells were cotransfected with Runx2.
CONCLUSION: An Egr2/Krox20-binding site located immediately upstream of the 
Runx2 site of the mouse OC promoter was identified as an enhancer in 
osteoblasts, whose activity is repressed by glucocorticoids. Sequence similarity 
suggests that such a mechanism is likely operative in both murine and human 
cells. Because glucocorticoids inhibit Egr2/Krox20 expression in osteoblasts, 
and because trabecular bone formation is arrested in Egr2/Krox20-knockout mice, 
the inhibition of Egr2/Krox20 activity likely contributes to 
glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis.
