Autoantibodies directed against citrulline-containing proteins have an 
impressive specificity of nearly 100% in patients with rheumatoid arthritis and 
have been suggested to be involved in the disease pathogenesis. The targeted 
epitopes are generated by a post-translational modification catalysed by the 
calcium-dependent enzyme peptidyl arginine deiminase (PAD), which converts 
positively charged arginine to polar but uncharged citrulline. The aim of this 
study was to explore the effects of citrullination on the immunogenicity of 
autoantigens as well as on potential arthritogenicity. Thus, immune responses to 
citrullinated rat serum albumin (Cit-RSA) and to unmodified rat serum albumin 
(RSA) were examined as well as arthritis development induced by immunisation 
with citrullinated rat collagen type II (Cit-CII) or unmodified CII. In 
addition, to correlate the presence of citrullinated proteins and the enzyme 
PAD4 with different stages of arthritis, synovial tissues obtained at different 
time points from rats with collagen-induced arthritis were examined 
immunohistochemically. Our results demonstrate that citrullination of the 
endogenous antigen RSA broke immunological tolerance, as was evident by the 
generation of antibodies directed against the modified protein and 
cross-reacting with the native protein. Furthermore we could demonstrate that 
Cit-CII induced arthritis with higher incidence and earlier onset than did the 
native counterpart. Finally, this study reveals that clinical signs of arthritis 
precede the presence of citrullinated proteins and the enzyme PAD4. As disease 
progressed into a more severe and chronic state, products of citrullination 
appeared specifically in the joints. Citrullinated proteins were detected mainly 
in extracellular deposits but could also be found in infiltrating cells and on 
the cartilage surface. PAD4 was detected in the cytoplasm of infiltrating 
mononuclear cells, from day 21 after immunisation and onwards. In conclusion, 
our data reveal the potency of citrullination to break tolerance against the 
self antigen RSA and to increase the arthritogenic properties of the cartilage 
antigen CII. We also show that citrullinated proteins and the enzyme PAD4 are 
not detectable in healthy joints, and that the appearance and amounts in 
arthritic joints of experimental animals are correlated with the severity of 
inflammation.
