Apocynin, an inhibitor of NADPH-oxidase, is known to partially reverse the 
inflammation-mediated cartilage proteoglycan synthesis in chondrocytes. More 
recently, it was reported that apocynin prevents cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 
expression in monocytes. The present study aimed to investigate whether these in 
vitro features of apocynin could be confirmed in vivo. In a mouse model of 
zymosan-induced acute arthritis apocynin was administered orally (0, 3.2, 16 and 
80 microg/ml in the drinking water) and the effects on cartilage proteoglycan 
synthesis were monitored. In a mouse model of zymosan-induced inflammation of 
the ears apocynin was administered orally (14 mg/kg/day by gavage) and the 
effects on ear swelling and ex vivo produced prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) by 
lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulated blood cells were measured. In this study, 
ibuprofen was used as a positive control (50 mg/kg/day by gavage) and animals 
received vehicle as a negative control. Apocynin dose-dependently reversed the 
inhibition of proteoglycan synthesis in articular cartilage of the arthritic 
joint. A statistically significant increase in proteoglycan synthesis was found 
at a dose of 80 microg/ml apocynin. Apocynin did not affect the proteoglycan 
synthesis of the control knee joints. Apocynin significantly decreased the 
zymosan-induced ear swelling at 1, 2 and 4 h (hours) after zymosan injection 
versus the vehicle treated group at 14 mg/kg/day. The ex vivo production of PGE2 
by LPS-stimulated blood cells was significantly decreased after in vivo apocynin 
treatment. Ibuprofen decreased ear swelling at the same time-points as apocynin 
and inhibited the ex vivo produced PGE2. In conclusion, the present study 
confirmed two important features of apocynin in vivo: (1) oral administration of 
apocynin can partially reverse the inflammation-induced inhibition of cartilage 
proteoglycan synthesis, and (2) oral administration of apocynin has COX 
inhibitory effects similar to the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) 
ibuprofen. Therefore, apocynin might be of potential use during the treatment of 
chronic inflammatory joint diseases like osteoarthritis or rheumatoid arthritis.
