BACKGROUND: Somatic afferent input to the spinal cord from a peripheral 
inflammatory site can modulate the peripheral response. However, the 
intracellular signaling mechanisms in the spinal cord that regulate this linkage 
have not been defined. Previous studies suggest spinal cord p38 
mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase and cytokines participate in nociceptive 
behavior. We therefore determined whether these pathways also regulate 
peripheral inflammation in rat adjuvant arthritis, which is a model of 
rheumatoid arthritis.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: Selective blockade of spinal cord p38 MAP kinase by 
administering the p38 inhibitor SB203580 via intrathecal (IT) catheters in rats 
with adjuvant arthritis markedly suppressed paw swelling, inhibited synovial 
inflammation, and decreased radiographic evidence of joint destruction. The same 
dose of SB203580 delivered systemically had no effect, indicating that the 
effect was mediated by local concentrations in the neural compartment. 
Evaluation of articular gene expression by quantitative real-time PCR showed 
that spinal p38 inhibition markedly decreased synovial interleukin-1 and -6 and 
matrix metalloproteinase (MMP3) gene expression. Activation of p38 required 
tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha) in the nervous system because IT 
etanercept (a TNF inhibitor) given during adjuvant arthritis blocked spinal p38 
phosphorylation and reduced clinical signs of adjuvant arthritis.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that peripheral inflammation is sensed by the 
central nervous system (CNS), which subsequently activates stress-induced 
kinases in the spinal cord via a TNFalpha-dependent mechanism. Intracellular p38 
MAP kinase signaling processes this information and profoundly modulates somatic 
inflammatory responses. Characterization of this mechanism could have clinical 
and basic research implications by supporting development of new treatments for 
arthritis and clarifying how the CNS regulates peripheral immune responses.
