OBJECTIVE: In postmenopausal rheumatoid arthritis (RA), both estrogen deficiency 
and the inflammatory disease contribute to the development of generalized 
osteoporosis. Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) with estradiol preserves bone 
mineral density (BMD) and ameliorates arthritis, but long-term therapy is no 
longer an option due to significant side effects. We therefore used a mouse 
model of human RA to test the hypothesis that a selective estrogen receptor 
modulator (SERM), the raloxifene analog LY117018, could be beneficial in the 
treatment of both arthritis and osteoporosis.
METHODS: Female DBA/1 mice were ovariectomized and arthritis was induced with 
collagen immunization. Mice received an injection of raloxifene, estradiol, or 
vehicle control, administered prophylactically or therapeutically, and 
thereafter the clinical arthritis score was evaluated continuously. At 
termination, BMD was analyzed with peripheral quantitative computed tomography. 
Paws were collected for histology, and sera were analyzed for cytokines and 
markers of bone and cartilage turnover. Levels of cytokine messenger RNA (mRNA) 
were investigated with real-time polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: Treatment with raloxifene dramatically decreased the frequency and 
severity of arthritis. Effective preservation of bone and cartilage was seen in 
raloxifene-exposed mice, as demonstrated by increased BMD and decreased serum 
levels of cartilage oligomeric matrix protein in the raloxifene-treated mice 
compared with controls. Decreased levels of mRNA for both tumor necrosis factor 
alpha and RANKL in spleen cells from raloxifene-treated arthritic mice indicated 
an immunosuppressive action of this SERM.
CONCLUSION: In a well-established model of postmenopausal RA, the raloxifene 
analog LY117018 potently inhibits the progression of arthritis and the 
associated development of osteoporosis, both in a prophylactic and in a 
therapeutic regimen. Since long-term HRT has been associated with significant 
side effects, raloxifene may be a useful adjuvant treatment for postmenopausal 
RA.
