BACKGROUND: Interactions between the phytochemicals and drugs and their 
combinations are capable of providing longer remissions and perhaps a complete 
cure for many diseases including rheumatoid arthritis (RA). In addition to 
articular manifestations in RA, extra-articular signs involving 
reticuloendothelial and hepatic systems are an indication of more severe disease 
and thus, have prognostic value.
OBJECTIVES: The present study was designed to illustrate the beneficial outcome 
of the drug Kalpaamruthaa (constituting Semecarpus anacardium nut milk extract, 
fresh dried powder of Emblica officinalis fruit and honey) in adjuvant-induced 
arthritic rat model with respect to the changes in extra-articular manifestation 
involving hematological and cellular constituents.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Levels of hematological parameters, cellular constituents, 
activities of marker enzymes and the level of DNA damage were assessed in 
control, arthritis-induced, SA, KA and drug control treated rats.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: Significant decrease (p<0.005) in the levels of Hb, RBC, 
PCV, total protein, albumin, A/G ratio, plasma uric acid, urinary urea, uric 
acid, creatinine, FFA, HDL and significant increase (p<0.05) in the levels of 
WBC, platelet count, ESR, globulin, plasma creatinine, blood glucose, urea, AST, 
ALT, ALP, TC, FC, TG, PL, LDL and VLDL were observed in arthritic rats. No other 
significant change was observed in tissue DNA and RNA levels of control and 
experimental animals. On the contrary an increase in DNA damage was observed in 
arthritic rats when compared to control animals. The above said derangements 
were brought back to near normal levels upon SA and KA treatments and KA 
revealed a profound beneficial effect than SA. The enhanced effect of KA might 
be attributed to the combined effects of phytoconstituents such as flavonoids, 
tannins and other compounds such as vitamin C present in KA. Thus KA via this 
preliminary protective effect might contribute to the amelioration of the 
disease process.
