OBJECTIVE: Blocking tumor necrosis factor (TNF) effectively inhibits 
inflammation and joint damage in rheumatoid arthritis (RA), but 40% of RA 
patients respond only transiently or not at all to the current anti-TNF 
biotherapies. The purpose of this study was to develop an alternative targeted 
therapy for this subgroup of RA patients. As proof of concept, we tested the 
efficiency of an RNA interference (RNAi)-based intervention that targets 
proinflammatory cytokines in suppressing murine collagen-induced arthritis 
(CIA).
METHODS: Two synthetic short interfering RNA (siRNA) sequences were designed for 
each of the proinflammatory cytokines interleukin-1 (IL-1), IL-6, and IL-18. 
Their silencing specificity was assessed according to lipopolysaccharide-induced 
messenger RNA expression in J774.1 mouse macrophages as compared with control 
siRNA. For in vivo administration, siRNA were formulated as lipoplexes with the 
RPR209120/DOPE liposome and a carrier DNA and were injected intravenously (0.5 
mg/kg) into DBA/1 mice with CIA.
RESULTS: Weekly injections of anti-IL-1, anti-IL-6, or anti-IL-18 siRNA-based 
lipoplexes significantly reduced the incidence and severity of arthritis, 
abrogating joint swelling and destruction of cartilage and bone, both in the 
preventative and the curative settings. The most striking therapeutic effect was 
observed when the 3 siRNA were delivered in combination. The siRNA lipoplex 
cocktail reduced all pathologic features of RA, including inflammation, joint 
destruction, and the Th1 response, and overall parameters of RA were improved as 
compared with anti-TNF siRNA lipoplex-based treatment.
CONCLUSION: Our results present a novel option for in vivo RNAi-based 
antiinflammatory immunotherapy. Our findings indicate that intravenous 
administration of a lipoplex cocktail containing several anticytokine siRNA is a 
promising novel antiinflammatory therapy for RA, as well as a useful and simple 
tool for understanding the pathophysiology of RA and for evaluating new 
therapeutic candidates.
