We previously reported that during total knee arthroplasty in rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA) patients, the use of tourniquet might promote local release of 
neutrophil elastase (NE) from neutrophils, which may contribute to the 
development of pulmonary thromboembolism (PTE) and tissue injury. The aim of 
this study was to develop PTE by the use of NE in a mouse model of 
collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) and investigate the relationship between 
thrombus and endothelial cells as well as the effect of recombinant human 
soluble thrombomodulin (rhs-TM) in reducing the risk of PTE. Male DBA/1J mice 
were injected intracutaneously at several sites with an emulsion containing 
bovine collagen and later a booster shot to produce CIA mice. Subsequently, NE 
was injected intravenously 2 times a day for 3 days and after a further 4 days, 
mice were sacrificed. A group of mice received rhs-TM injections prior to NE 
injections. We divided the mice into four groups of normal, CIA control, CIA + 
NE, and CIA + rhs-TM + NE mice and evaluated thrombus formation status. All CIA 
+ NE mice developed PTE. In contrast, no thrombosis was found in normal control, 
CIA control and CIA + rhs-TM + NE mice. Plasma thrombin level, fibrinogen 
expression and neutrophil count were increased in CIA + NE mice. Double staining 
for anticoagulant TM and procoagulant von Willebrand factor (vWF) in pulmonary 
endothelial cells in normal mice showed a TM-dominant expression while in both 
CIA control and CIA + NE mice a vWF-dominant expression compatible with 
coagulant status was observed. Injection of rhs-TM into CIA + NE mice resulted 
in a phenotypic conversion of endothelial cells from vWF-dominant to TM-dominant 
expression and a reduction in fibrinogen deposition. These findings demonstrate 
that by repeated use of NE in CIA mice, it is feasible to produce PTE and to 
study its pathogenesis and that rhs-TM reduces the risk of PTE. We suggest that 
in surgical operations of upper and lower extremities in RA patients, the use of 
a tourniquet should be avoided as it may trigger NE release.
