BACKGROUND: One of the hallmarks of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is hyperplasia and 
inflammation of the synovial tissue being characterized by in situ occurrence of 
highly differentiated leukocytes. Fms-like tyrosine kinase 3 (Flt3) has a 
crucial role in hematopoiesis, regulation of cell proliferation, differentiation 
and apoptosis. Typically, Flt3 is expressed on early myeloid and lymphoid 
progenitors and is activated by its soluble ligand (Flt3-L). The highly 
differentiated cellular pattern in the synovium of the RA patients made us 
hypothesize that Flt3-L, with its ability to induce proliferation and 
differentiation, could be of importance in induction and/or progression of 
arthritis.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: To investigate occurrence of Flt3-L in RA we 
have measured its levels in matched serum and synovial fluid samples from 130 
patients and 107 controls. To analyse the pro-inflammatory role of Flt3-L, we 
continuously overexpressed this protein locally in healthy mouse joints using 
homologous B-cell line transfected with Flt3-L gene. Additionally, recombinant 
Flt3-L was instillated intra-articularly in combination with peptidoglycans, a 
Toll Like Receptor 2-ligand with stong arthritogenic properties. Our results 
show significantly higher levels of Flt3-L in the synovial fluid as compared to 
serum levels in RA subjects (p = 0.0001). In addition, RA synovial fluid levels 
of Flt-3-L were significantly higher than these obtained from synovial fluids 
originating from non-inflammatory joint diseases (p = 0.022). Intra-articular 
administration of B-cell line transfected with Flt3-L gene resulted in highly 
erosive arthritis while inoculation of the same B-cell line without 
hyperexpression of Flt3-L did not induce erosivity and only in a minority of 
cases caused synovial proliferation! Flt3-ligand potentiated peptidoglycan 
induced arthritis as compared to mice injected with peptidoglycan alone 
(p<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our findings indicate that Flt3-L is strongly 
expressed at the site of inflammation in human RA. It exerts both 
pro-inflammatory and tissue destructive properties once in the joint cavity. 
Owing to these properties, treatment attempts to neutralize this molecule should 
be considered in RA.
