Brief virologic news included the discovery of the virophage, a unique parasite 
of the giant mimivirus and the association of HHV-8 infection with a peculiar 
form of African diabetes. Secondly, this news focused on risk factors for 
arterial or venous thrombosis and therapy for auto-immune disorders. Only oral 
estrogen therapy increases the risk of venous thromboembolism in postmenopausal 
women. Despite significant homocysteine lowering, vitamin supplementation with 
folic acid, vitamins B6 and B12 did not reduce total cardiovascular events among 
high-risk patients. Patients with venous thromboembolism have a substantially 
increased long-term risk of subsequent cardiovascular events while obesity, 
systemic arterial hypertension, and diabetes are common risk factors for 
arterial and venous thrombosis. The non fasting ApoB/ApoA1 ratio was superior to 
any of the cholesterol ratios for estimation of the risk of acute myocardial 
infection in all ethnic groups. Preventive anticoagulation of in-patients with 
risk of venous thromboembolism was inadequately prescribed in many hospitals of 
the world. Subcutaneous administration of methotrexate was more effective than 
the oral administration at the same dosage in patients suffering from active 
rheumatoid arthritis. Hydroxychloroquine directly reduces the binding of 
antiphospholipid antibody-beta2-glycoprotein I complexes to phospholipid 
bilayers. Anti-IL-5 and anti-IL-6 antibodies were effective for the treatment of 
respectively hypereosinophilic syndrome and rheumatoid arthritis. The efficacy 
of proteasome inhibitors and mesenchymal stems cells have been demonstrated in 
respectively two mouse strains with lupus-like disease and steroid-resistant 
severe acute graft-versus-host disease. These treatments may be useful for 
auto-immune disorders if their long term toxicity is acceptable. In conclusion, 
subcutaneous injections of physiological saline, used as placebo in two 
different trials, enhanced in vitro activation of immunocompetent cells in 
healthy individuals.
