Thioredoxin systems, involving redox active thioredoxins and thioredoxin 
reductases, sustain a number of important thioredoxin-dependent pathways. These 
redox active proteins support several processes crucial for cell function, cell 
proliferation, antioxidant defense and redox-regulated signaling cascades. 
Mammalian thioredoxin reductases are selenium-containing flavoprotein 
oxidoreductases, dependent upon a selenocysteine residue for reduction of the 
active site disulfide in thioredoxins. Their activity is required for normal 
thioredoxin function. The mammalian thioredoxin reductases also display 
surprisingly multifaceted properties and functions beyond thioredoxin reduction. 
Expressed from three separate genes (in human named TXNRD1, TXNRD2 and TXNRD3), 
the thioredoxin reductases can each reduce a number of different types of 
substrates in different cellular compartments. Their expression patterns involve 
intriguingly complex transcriptional mechanisms resulting in several splice 
variants, encoding a number of protein variants likely to have specialized 
functions in a cell- and tissue-type restricted manner. The thioredoxin 
reductases are also targeted by a number of drugs and compounds having an impact 
on cell function and promoting oxidative stress, some of which are used in 
treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, cancer or other diseases. However, potential 
specific or essential roles for different forms of human or mouse thioredoxin 
reductases in health or disease are still rather unclear, although it is known 
that at least the murine Txnrd1 and Txnrd2 genes are essential for normal 
development during embryogenesis. This review is a survey of current knowledge 
of mammalian thioredoxin reductase function and expression, with a focus on 
human and mouse and a discussion of the striking complexity of these proteins. 
Several yet open questions regarding their regulation and roles in different 
cells or tissues are emphasized. It is concluded that the intriguingly complex 
regulation and function of mammalian thioredoxin reductases within the cellular 
context and in intact mammals strongly suggests that their functions are highly 
fi ne-tuned with the many pathways involving thioredoxins and 
thioredoxin-related proteins. These selenoproteins furthermore propagate many 
functions beyond a reduction of thioredoxins. Aberrant regulation of thioredoxin 
reductases, or a particular dependence upon these enzymes in diseased cells, may 
underlie their presumed therapeutic importance as enzymatic targets using 
electrophilic drugs. These reductases are also likely to mediate several of the 
effects on health and disease that are linked to different levels of nutritional 
selenium intake. The thioredoxin reductases and their splice variants may be 
pivotal components of diverse cellular signaling pathways, having importance in 
several redox-related aspects of health and disease. Clearly, a detailed 
understanding of mammalian thioredoxin reductases is necessary for a full 
comprehension of the thioredoxin system and of selenium dependent processes in 
mammals.
