In both adjuvant arthritis and rheumatoid arthritis, edema and inflammation 
appear in synovial joints. Edema or effusion reflects an imbalance in lymph 
dynamics. Purified micronized flavonoid fraction is mainly used in the treatment 
of chronic venous insufficiency. This compound improves lymphatic drainage with 
a significant increase in lymphatic flow and lymphatic pulsality. It is 
suggested that the beneficial effect of purified micronized flavonoid fraction 
may be involved in the treatment of adjuvant arthritis in rats. In this study 
treatment of adjuvant arthritis in rats with Detralex, methotrexate, and their 
combination were evaluated. Groups of rats with adjuvant arthritis were treated 
with methotrexate (0.6 mg/kg/week), Detralex (20 mg/kg/day), and their 
combination for 50 days from adjuvant application. Hind paw swelling, arthrogram 
scores, serum albumin level, serum nitrite/nitrate concentrations, and 
whole-body mineral density were evaluated as markers of inflammation and 
destructive changes associated with arthritis. Long-term prophylactic treatment 
with low-dose methotrexate significantly inhibited the markers of both 
inflammation and arthritis. Detralex administered alone slightly decreased both 
the hind paw swelling and the arthritic score. Other inflammatory and arthritic 
markers were not significantly influenced. However, Detralex combined with 
methotrexate markedly potentiated the beneficial effects of methotrexate, which 
resulted in a more significant reduction in hind paw swelling, arthritic scores, 
and serum concentrations of nitrite/nitrate. Interestingly, the 
arthritis-induced decrease of bone mineral density in AA rats was significantly 
lower only in the group treated with the combination of Detralex and 
methotrexate. Our results indicate that Detralex increased the therapeutic 
efficacy of methotrexate basal treatment in AA. We suggest that this may be 
related to the beneficial effect of Detralex on microcirculation, especially on 
venules and lymphatic vessels.
