OBJECTIVE: Studies have suggested that rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and 
osteoarthritis (OA) share common characteristics. The highly selective A(3) 
adenosine receptor agonist CF101 was recently defined as a potent 
antiinflammatory agent for the treatment of RA. The purpose of this study was to 
examine the effects of CF101 on the clinical and pathologic manifestations of OA 
in an experimental animal model.
METHODS: OA was induced in rats by monosodium iodoacetate, and upon disease 
onset, oral treatment with CF101 (100 microg/kg given twice daily) was 
initiated. The A(3) adenosine receptor antagonist MRS1220 (100 microg/kg given 
twice daily) was administered orally, 30 minutes before CF101 treatment. The OA 
clinical score was monitored by knee diameter measurements and by radiographic 
analyses. Histologic analyses were performed following staining with hematoxylin 
and eosin, Safranin O-fast green, or toluidine blue, and histologic changes were 
scored according to a modified Mankin system. Signaling proteins were assayed by 
Western blotting; apoptosis was detected via immunohistochemistry and TUNEL 
analyses.
RESULTS: CF101 induced a marked decrease in knee diameter and improved the 
changes noted on radiographs. Administration of MRS1220 counteracted the effects 
of CF101. CF101 prevented cartilage damage, osteoclast/osteophyte formation, and 
bone destruction. In addition, CF101 markedly reduced pannus formation and 
lymphocyte infiltration. Mechanistically, CF101 induced deregulation of the 
NF-kappaB signaling pathway, resulting in down-regulation of tumor necrosis 
factor alpha. Consequently, CF101 induced apoptosis of inflammatory cells that 
had infiltrated the knee joints; however, it prevented apoptosis of 
chondrocytes.
CONCLUSION: CF101 deregulated the NF-kappaB signaling pathway involved in the 
pathogenesis of OA. CF101 induced apoptosis of inflammatory cells and acted as a 
cartilage protective agent, which suggests that it would be a suitable candidate 
drug for the treatment of OA.
