INTRODUCTION: Osteoclasts play a key role in the pathogenesis of bone erosion 
and systemic bone mass loss during rheumatoid arthritis (RA). In this study, we 
aimed to determine the effect of methotrexate (MTX) and zoledronic acid (ZA), 
used alone or in combination, on osteoclast-mediated bone erosions and systemic 
bone mass loss in a rat model of collagen induced arthritis (CIA). We 
hypothesized that MTX and ZA could have an additive effect to prevent both bone 
erosion and systemic bone loss.
METHODS: Arthritis was induced in 64 female Sprague-Dawley rats. After the 
clinical onset of CIA, rats were assigned to treatment with MTX (1 mg/kg/week), 
ZA (100 microg/kg twice weekly), both treatments at the same regimens, or 
vehicle. Arthritis score and paw thickness were recorded twice weekly. The rats 
were sacrificed on D28 and hind paws were removed for radiographic, histological 
and immunohistochemical analysis. The effects of treatments on 
osteoclastogenesis were determined by Tartrate resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP) 
staining. Micro-CT of the tibia was carried out for histomorphometric analysis. 
Bone mass density was evaluated by densitometry.
RESULTS: MTX significantly decreased the severity of CIA, whereas ZA slightly 
exacerbated it. When these two drugs were used in combination, MTX prevented the 
pro-inflammatory effect of ZA. The combination of ZA with MTX was more effective 
than MTX alone for reducing structural joint damage with a dramatic decrease of 
osteoclasts' number in the eroded joints. However, MTX alone also significantly 
reduced the number of osteoclasts and the number of CD68+ mononuclear cells. ZA 
alone, or ZA with MTX, significantly increased the systemic bone mass density 
measured by densitometry and bone volume on histomorphometric analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: A combination of MTX and ZA prevented both bone erosion and 
systemic bone loss in a rat model of arthritis. Both treatments independently 
decreased the number of osteoclasts in the eroded joint. However, while MTX 
probably acts mainly through a decrease of inflammation, ZA has a direct effect 
on osteoclasts, allowing a dramatic down-regulation of these cells in inflamed 
joints. These two different mechanisms of action provide support for the use of 
a combination of these two drugs to improve the prevention of structural joint 
damage in RA.
