OBJECTIVE: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is the most common systemic autoimmune 
disease and is characterized mainly by symmetric polyarticular joint disorders. 
The pathologic processes are mediated by a number of cytokines, chemokines, cell 
adhesion molecules, and matrix metalloproteinases. The expression of most of 
these molecules is controlled at the transcriptional level. In addition, 
activation of NF-kappaB is involved in RA pathogenesis. This study was performed 
to explore the role of a novel serine/threonine kinase inhibitor, fasudil, in 
the control of the NF-kappaB activation pathway and to investigate the 
therapeutic effects of fasudil on arthritis development in a rat model of RA.
METHODS: Fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS) from RA patients and human 
endothelial cells (ECs) were established and maintained. To study the role of 
fasudil on cytokine expression, various cytokines expressed in the RA FLS and 
human ECs were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay following 
stimulation of the cells with interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta) in the presence of 
various concentrations of fasudil. The role of fasudil on NF-kappaB activation 
was studied using a reporter gene assay, Western blotting of IkappaBalpha, 
immunofluorescence analysis of the p65 subunit of NF-kappaB, and electrophoretic 
mobility shift assay. The in vivo effects of fasudil on arthritis were studied 
in a rat adjuvant-induced arthritis (AIA) model.
RESULTS: Fasudil inhibited cytokine expression in RA FLS and human ECs and also 
inhibited the activation of ECs, in a dose-dependent manner. Fasudil inhibited 
IL-1beta-induced activation of NF-kappaB independent of the inhibition of 
IkappaBalpha degradation and nuclear translocation of NF-kappaB, and inhibited 
IL-1beta-induced DNA binding of NF-kappaB. Finally, in vivo, fasudil ameliorated 
arthritis in rats with AIA, without any adverse effects.
CONCLUSION: Serine/threonine kinase inhibitor fasudil inhibits the development 
of arthritis in a rat model of RA, and also inhibits the NF-kappaB signaling 
required for binding of NF-kappaB to specific DNA sequences through, for 
example, the phosphorylation of p65, suggesting that a specific target of 
fasudil might be a novel NF-kappaB kinase. Thus, fasudil serves as a novel 
strategy for the treatment of RA.
