The mechanism of autoantibodies (rheumatoid factor (RF) and anti-collagen 
autoantibodies) induction in collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) is unknown. The 
study assessed the hypothesis that activation of autoantibody-producing clones 
is mediated by idiotype-anti-idiotype (IAI) interactions with lymphocytes on 
heterologous collagen. It was demonstrated that RF-containing serum of rats 
immunized with bovine collagen (BCII) in ELISA competes with BCII for binding to 
anti-BCII antibodies. Immunization of rats with Fc fragments of IgG caused not 
only an increase in RF levels, but also induction of antibodies to BCII and 
anti-collagen autoantibodies. Taken together, these facts suggest that 
activation of RF-producing lymphocytes in CIA model occurs through IAI 
interactions with anti-BCII lymphocytes. Three populations of antibodies were 
detected in the blood of arthritic rats: a population of antibodies reacting 
only with BCII, a population of antibodies reacting only with rat collagen 
(RCII) and a population of antibodies that can bind to both bovine and rat 
collagen. It was shown that RF in relation to anti-collagen autoantibodies act 
as anti-idiotype antibodies, and a comparative analysis of antibody production 
in arthritic and resistant rats demonstrated that the level of anti-collagen 
autoantibody production depends on the level of RF production. This suggests 
that RF and RF-producing lymphocytes are involved in regulation of anti-collagen 
autoreactive lymphocyte activity through an IAI interaction mechanism. A direct 
activation of autoreactive anti-RCII lymphocytes by BCII cannot be excluded, but 
it can be supposed that induction of anti-collagen autoreactive lymphocytes 
needs a signal generated in IAI interactions by RF-producing lymphocytes. This 
hypothesis is based on the data obtained, and not only explains the mechanism of 
autoreactive lymphocytes activation in the rat CIA model, but also indicates 
that the key regulatory element in the development of arthritis in animals is 
RF-producing lymphocytes. The results allow a new insight on the role of RF in 
the pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis and on seeking more effective 
therapeutic means.
