OBJECTIVE: RNA interference (RNAi) is a powerful tool for sequence-specific gene 
silencing, and interest in its application in human diseases is growing. Given 
the success of recent strategies for administering gene therapy in rheumatoid 
arthritis using recombinant vectors such as adeno-associated virus type 5 
(rAAV5) for optimized intraarticular gene transfer, we undertook the present 
study to determine the feasibility of using rAAV5-mediated RNAi-based therapy in 
arthritis.
METHODS: We developed rAAV5 vectors expressing short hairpin small interfering 
RNA (shRNA) against tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha) under H1 promoter, 
and carrying the enhanced green fluorescent protein (eGFP) reporter gene under 
cytomegalovirus promoter (rAAV5-shTNF). TNFalpha gene silencing was validated in 
vitro with mouse macrophages. Mice with collagen-induced arthritis were injected 
in the ankle and knee joints, at disease onset, with either rAAV5-shTNF or 
control rAAV5-eGFP vectors (5 x 10(9) particles). Arthritis severity was 
assessed clinically and histologically, and immunologic response was examined. 
Local and systemic transgene expression was monitored using quantitative reverse 
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction, immunohistochemical analysis, and 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
RESULTS: After a single injection of rAAV5-shTNF into inflamed joints, local 
TNFalpha gene silencing provided rapid and long-term suppression of arthritis 
progression and reduced joint damage compared with that observed in control 
groups. Treatment with rAAV5-shTNF was associated with decreased proliferation 
and interferon-gamma production by antigen-stimulated T cells from draining 
lymph nodes, and the potency of this treatment was similar to that observed with 
other treatment strategies targeting TNFalpha at the protein level, either 
locally or systemically.
CONCLUSION: Our data present the first proof-of-concept for the application of 
rAAV5-mediated RNAi-based gene therapy for local blockade of inflammation in 
experimental arthritis.
