Etoricoxib, a highly selective cyclooxygenase- 2 (COX-2) inhibitor (a non 
steroidal anti-inflammatory drug) used for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis 
and osteoarthritis, has been newly marketed and studied for the chemopreventive 
response in the 1,2-dimethylhydrazine dihydrochloride (DMH) induced rat colon 
cancer model. Male Sprague-Dawley rats were divided into four groups. Group I 
served as the Control and received the vehicle treatment, while Groups 2 and 3 
were administered freshly prepared DMH (30 mg/kg body weight, subcutaneously) in 
1mM EDTA-saline (pH 7.0). Groups 3 and 4 received Etoricoxib (0.64 mg/kg body 
weight, orally) daily prepared in 0.5% carboxymethyl cellulose. After a 6 week 
treatment period, animals were sacrificed and the colons were subjected to 
macroscopic and histopathological studies. Well characterized pre-neoplastic 
features such as multiple plaque lesions (MPLs), aberrant crypts (ACs) and 
aberrant crypt foci (ACF) were found in the DMH group. The number was reduced in 
DMH + Etoricoxib group, while very few MPLs and ACFs were recorded in the 
Etoricoxib only group. Also, histologically well characterized dysplasia and 
hyperplasia were observed in DMH treated group. The simultaneous administration 
of DMH and Etoricoxib reduced these features. To study apoptosis, colonocytes 
were isolated by metal chelation from colonic sacs and studied by fluorescent 
staining. The DMH treated animals produced much less apoptotic nuclei as 
compared to the Control. The number of apoptotic nuclei was also found higher in 
the DMH + Etoricoxib group as well as in Etoricoxib only group. Studies of a 
nuclear transcription factor (NF-kB) and COX-2 by Western blot analysis and 
immunohistochemistry demonstrated expression of both to be elevated in the DMH 
treated group but reduced in the DMH + Etoricoxib group. Expression was also low 
in the Etoricoxib only group. It may be concluded that the drug, Etoricoxib, has 
the potential to reduce DMH induced colon cancer development.
