OBJECTIVE: The multikinase inhibitor META060 has been shown to inhibit NF-kappaB 
activation and expression of markers of inflammation. This study was undertaken 
to investigate the effect of META060 on biomarkers associated with bone and 
cartilage degradation in vitro and its antiinflammatory efficacy in vivo in both 
acute and chronic inflammation models.
METHODS: Glycogen synthase kinase 3beta (GSK3beta)-dependent beta-catenin 
phosphorylation was evaluated in RAW 264.7 macrophages to assess kinase 
inhibition. The inhibition of osteoclastogenesis and tartrate-resistant acid 
phosphatase (TRAP) activity was evaluated in RANKL-treated RAW 264.7 cells. The 
inhibition of interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta)-mediated markers of inflammation was 
analyzed in human rheumatoid arthritis synovial fibroblasts (RASFs). Mice with 
carrageenan-induced acute inflammation and collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) were 
used to assess efficacy.
RESULTS: META060 inhibited the activity of kinases (spleen tyrosine kinase 
[Syk], Bruton's tyrosine kinase [Btk], phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase [PI 
3-kinase], and GSK3) associated with RA and inhibited beta-catenin 
phosphorylation. META060 inhibited osteoclastogenesis, as indicated by decreased 
transformation of RAW 264.7 cells to osteoclasts and reduced TRAP activity, and 
inhibited IL-1beta-activated prostaglandin E(2), matrix metalloproteinase 3, 
IL-6, IL-8, and monocyte chemotactic protein 1 in RASFs. In mice with acute 
inflammation, oral administration of META060 reduced paw swelling similar to the 
effect of aspirin. In mice with CIA, META060 significantly reduced the arthritis 
index and decreased bone, joint, and cartilage degradation. Serum IL-6 
concentrations in these mice were inhibited in a dose-dependent manner.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate that META060 reduces swelling in a model of 
acute inflammation and inhibits bone and cartilage destruction in a model of 
chronic inflammation. Its efficacy is associated with the inhibition of multiple 
protein kinases, including Syk, Btk, PI 3-kinase, and GSK3. These results 
warrant further clinical testing of META060 for its therapeutic potential in the 
treatment of inflammatory diseases.
