INTRODUCTION: Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are involved in both innate and 
adaptive immune responses and are likely to play a complex role in the 
pathogenesis of human rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and experimental arthritis. The 
objective of this study was to identify the key TLR in pristane-induced 
arthritis (PIA), a rat model for RA, and to clarify its roles in the initiation 
and maintenance of arthritis.
METHODS: Arthritis in DA rats was induced by pristane and the severity was 
evaluated by macroscopic and microscopic score systems. Spleen TLR and cytokine 
expression was detected at different time points by real-time polymerase chain 
reaction (PCR) and flow cytometry. Polyinosine-polycytidylic acid (polyI:C, a 
ligand of TLR3) or TLR3 specific short-hairpin RNA plasmid for RNA interference 
was administrated to PIA rats in vivo. Serum nitrogen oxide concentration was 
determined by Griess method, and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) was 
determined by L929 biotest. In splenic macrophages, TLR3 expression was measured 
by flow cytometry. A rat macrophage cell line (NR8383) was stimulated by 
pristane, and anti-TLR3 antibody were used to block TLR3 pathway. TLR3 and 
cytokine expression in NR8383 were detected by real-time PCR.
RESULTS: By screening the TLR expression profile in spleen of DA rats after 
pristane injection, we found that TLR3 was the most early and prominently 
upregulated TLR. Both TLR3 mRNA and protein expression of spleen were 
upregulated at 6 and 26 days after pristane injection. Furthermore, 
administration of polyI:C exacerbated, whereas RNA interference targeting TLR3 
ameliorated, the arthritis. Particularly, TLR3 expression was induced in splenic 
macrophages of PIA rats, and also in the NR8383 cell line after pristane 
stimulation in a dose- and time- dependent manner. Upregulation of interferon 
beta (IFN-beta) and TNF-alpha by pristane stimulation was blocked by anti-TLR3 
antibody in NR8383.
CONCLUSIONS: TLR3 plays a pivotal role in the initiation and development of PIA 
which may dependent on macrophage. These findings are useful to understand the 
pathogenesis of RA and may provide an intriguing therapeutic opportunity for RA.
