BACKGROUND: A major subgroup of patients with temporomandibular joint (TMJ) 
disorders have masticatory muscle hypersensitivity. To study myofacial 
temporomandibular pain, a number of preclinical models have been developed to 
induce myogenic pain of the masseter muscle, one of the four muscles involved in 
mastication. The currently used models, however, generate pain that decreases 
over time and only lasts from hours to weeks and hence are not suitable for 
studying chronicity of the myogenic pain in TMJ disorders. Here we report a 
model of constant myogenic orofacial pain that lasts for months.
RESULTS: The model involves unilateral ligation of the tendon of the anterior 
superficial part of the rat masseter muscle (TASM). The ligation of the TASM was 
achieved with two chromic gut (4.0) ligatures via an intraoral approach. 
Nocifensive behavior of the rat was assessed by probing the skin site above the 
TASM with a series of von Frey filaments. The response frequencies were 
determined and an EF50 value, defined as the von Frey filament force that 
produces a 50% response frequency, was derived and used as a measure of 
mechanical sensitivity. Following TASM ligation, the EF50 of the injured side 
was significantly reduced and maintained throughout the 8-week observation 
period, suggesting the presence of mechanical hyperalgesia/allodynia. In 
sham-operated rats, the EF50 of the injured side was transiently reduced for 
about a week, likely due to injury produced by the surgery. Somatotopically 
relevant Fos protein expression was indentified in the subnucleus caudalis of 
the spinal trigeminal sensory complex. In the same region, persistent 
upregulation of NMDA receptor NR1 phosphorylation and protein expression and 
increased expression of glial markers glial fibrillary acidic protein 
(astroglia) and CD11b (microglia) were found. Morphine (0.4-8 mg/kg, s.c.) and 
duloxetine (0.4-20 mg/kg, i.p.), a selective serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake 
inhibitor, produced dose-dependent attenuation of hyperalgesia.
CONCLUSIONS: Ligation injury of the TASM in rats led to long-lasting and 
constant mechanical hypersensitivity of myogenic origin. The model will be 
particularly useful in studying the chronicity of myogenic pain TMJ disorders. 
The model can also be adapted to other regions of the body for studying 
pathology of painful tendinopathy seen in sports injury, muscle overuse, and 
rheumatoid arthritis.
