Mast cells are involved in immune disorders so that many of the proinflammatory 
and tissue destructive mediators produced by these cells have been implicated in 
the pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis. This scenario prompted us to 
investigate the correlation between mast cell degranulation and neutrophil 
influx within the digits and knees joints of arthritic mice assessing what could 
be the functional role(s) of joint mast cells in the response to collagen 
immunization. DBA/1J mice were submitted to collagen-induced arthritis and 
disease was assessed on day 21, 32 and 42 post-immunization. Pharmacological 
treatment with the glucocorticoid prednisolone, commonly used in the clinic, and 
nedocromil, a mast cell stabilizer, was performed from day 21 to 30. Arthritis 
develop after immunization, gradually increased up to day 42. Neutrophil 
infiltration peaked on day 32 and 21, in the digits and knees, respectively, 
showing an unequal pattern of recruitment between these tissues. This difference 
emerged for mast cells: they peaked in the digits on day 21, but a higher degree 
of degranulation could be measured in the knee joints. Uneven modulation of 
arthritis occurred after treatment of mice with prednisolone or nedocromil. 
Neutrophils migration to the tissue was reduced after both therapies, but only 
prednisolone augmented mast cell migration to the joints. Nedocromil exerted 
inhibitory properties both on mast cell proliferation and migration, more 
effectively on the digit joints. Thus, collagen induced an inflammatory process 
characterized by tissue mast cells activation and degranulation, suggesting a 
potential driving force in propagating inflammatory circuits yielding 
recruitment of neutrophils. However, the different degree of affected joint 
involvement suggests a time-related implication of digits and knees during 
collagen-induced arthritis development. These results provide evidence for local 
alterations whereby mast cells contribute to the initiation of inflammatory 
arthritis and may be targeted in intervention strategies.
