INTRODUCTION: Chemokines and their receptors are potential therapeutic targets 
in rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Among these, several studies suggested the 
involvement of CXC chemokine 4 (CXCR4) and its ligand CXC ligand 12 (SDF-1) in 
RA pathogenesis. However, the role of these molecules in T-cell function is not 
known completely because of embryonic lethality of Cxcr4- and Cxcl12-deficient 
mice. In this report, we generated T cell-specific Cxcr4-deficient mice and 
showed that the CXCR4 in T cells is important for the development of 
collagen-induced arthritis (CIA).
METHODS: T cell-specific Cxcr4-deficient mice were generated by using the 
Cre-loxP system. Mice harboring loxP sites flanking exon 2 of the Cxcr4gene 
(Cxcr4flox/flox) were generated by homologous recombination and crossed with Cre 
transgenic mice expressing Cre recombinase under the control of Lck promoter 
(Cxcr4+/+/Lck-Cremice) to generate T cell-specific Cxcr4-deficient mice 
(Cxcr4flox/flox/Lck-Cre mice). CIA was induced by immunization with chicken type 
II collagen and Complete Freund's Adjuvant (CFA).
RESULTS: The incidence, but not the severity, of CIA was significantly reduced 
in Cxcr4flox/flox/Lck-Cre mice compared with Cxcr4+/+/Lck-Cre mice. We found 
that the expression of CXCR4 was enhanced in activated T cells, and the 
migration of Cxcr4-deficient T cells toward SDF-1 was severely impaired. 
However, antibody production, cellular proliferative response, and cytokine 
production on treatment with type II collagen (IIC) were normal in these 
knockout mice, suggesting that CXCR4 is not involved in T-helper functions. 
Interestingly, the proportion of CXCR4-expressing T cells was much increased in 
affected joints compared with that in draining lymph nodes in CIA-induced mice, 
and distribution of Cxcr4flox/flox/Lck-Cre mouse-derived T cells into affected 
joints was suppressed compared with that in Cxcr4+/+/Lck-Cre T cells.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that CXCR4 expression in T cells is 
important for the development of CIA, by recruiting activated T cells toward 
inflammatory sites, and suggest that CXCR4 is a good target for the treatment of 
RA in humans.
