BACKGROUND: The use of mouse models to study human disease provides useful data 
that can provide support for research projects or an existing drug discovery 
program. How well a model recapitulates the human condition and the ease and 
reproducibility of data collected will determine how much confidence a scientist 
can place on results obtained. Designing new treatments for rheumatic diseases, 
such as rheumatoid arthritis (RA), requires complex immunocompetent models that 
depend on intricate cytokine networks. Using local cytokines, signal 
transduction and transcription factor molecules as potential biomarkers to 
monitor disease and treatment efficacy is the best method to follow the 
progression of tissue damage and repair when testing an unknown compound or 
biologic. Described here in this report, a novel method for the non-enzymatic 
extraction and measurement of cytokines and signal transducers and activators of 
transcription (STAT) molecules using Luminex® bead array technology in two 
different mouse models for human RA--collagen antibody-dependent arthritis 
(CAIA) and collagen-induced arthritis (CIA).
RESULTS: Dynamic expression of several pro-inflammatory cytokines responsible 
for promoting disease augmentation overtime were monitored, such as IL-1β, TNFα, 
IL-6 and IL-12, locally in the paws of affected animals directly ex vivo. Local 
cytokine responses could be matched with serum cytokine levels and joint 
pathology results. In addition, STAT1, 3, and 5a/b activation status could be 
monitored with confidence using specifically formulated extraction buffer that 
protected the phosphorylation site. STAT3 activation followed paw swelling and 
cytokine levels in both models and correlates of disease could be ablated upon 
treatment with dexamethasone. Here reported a novel method of extracting joint 
fluid from the paws of inflamed mice coupled with powerful multiplex bead 
technology allowing us to measure cytokine responses, pharmacodynamic markers 
such as STATs and pharmacokinetic analysis of dosed agent all from the same 
sample directly ex vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: This method is powerful in that it is applicable to multiple 
autoimmunity model types, streamlines ex vivo readouts in a high-throughput 
manner, and allows multiplexing providing the investigator with an array of 
options and possible analytes when developing preclinical animal models to 
support drug discovery efforts in the search for new treatments for rheumatic 
diseases.
