OBJECTIVE: To explore the anti-angiogenic effects of genistein on synovium in a 
rat model of type II collagen-induced arthritis (CIA).
METHODS: Forty SD rats were randomly divided into normal group, model group, 
genistein group, methotrexate (MTX) group and Gen plus MTX group with 8 rats in 
each group. Arthritis in rats was induced by subcutaneous injection of type II 
collagen combined with complete Freund's adjuvant (CFA). On the second day after 
the injection, 1 mL of suspension liquid of genistein (30 mg/kg body weight, 
once daily) and MTX (0.2 mg/kg body weight, once a week) were administered by 
oral gavage respectively. The rats in normal group and model group were 
administered with normal saline in the same volume. Synovium of knee joints and 
peripheral serum were collected from the CIA rats. Microvessel density in 
synovium (MVD) was detected by immunohistochemical method and serum vascular 
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and matrix metallopeptidase (MMP)-1, 2 and 9 
levels were detected by using Western blotting.
RESULTS: Arthritis index score, paw volume of rats in the model group were 
significantly higher than those in the normal group (P<0.05), which suggested 
that a model of CIA induced by injection of type II collagen and CFA was 
successfully constructed. The arthritis index scores of rats in the treatment 
groups were decreased compared with the model group. The results of Western 
blotting showed that genistein obviously attenuate the levels of VEGF and MMP-1, 
2 and 9 in serum (P<0.05). Immunohistochemical method showed that MVDs in the 
treatment groups were reduced as compared with the model group.
CONCLUSION: The expressions of VEGF and MMP-1, 2 and 9 are related to the 
synovial pannus formation in CIA rats. The anti-angiogenic activity of genistein 
may correlate to its inhibitory effect on the expressions of VEGF and MMP-1, 2 
and 9 in serum of CIA rats; genistein plus MTX are superior to single agents in 
treating rheumatoid arthritis.
