OBJECTIVES: Rat collagen II-induced arthritis is a model of chronic inflammation 
induced by mycobacterium butyricum and collagen II. It is characterized by 
similar pathophysiological and pathobiochemical changes as rheumatoid arthritis 
(RA) in humans. In the present study, the biochemical effects of vitamin E and 
allopurinol (Allo) on RA of rats were investigated.
METHODS: Forty male rats were divided into four groups (10 rats each): control 
group, collagen II-induced RA group (CII group), CII group treated with 
allopurinol (CII+ Allo), and CII group treated with vitamin E (CII + Vit E). 
After 6 weeks of treatment, the plasma levels of lipid peroxides (LPO), nitric 
oxide (NO), ceruloplasmin (CP), superoxide dismutase (SOD), uric acid (UA) and 
glutathione (GSH) were detected using colorimetric methods. The plasma levels of 
PGE2 were measured using ELISA assay. The plasma levels of copper (Cu) and zinc 
(Zn) were determined using atomic absorption spectrometer.
RESULTS: In CII treated group, the levels of LPO, NO, PGE2, UA, CP and Cu were 
significantly higher, but the levels of SOD, GSH and Zn were significantly lower 
than controls. In CII + Allo treated group, the levels of SOD and GSH were 
significantly increased, but the levels of PGE2, LPO, NO, UA, Cu and CP were 
significantly decreased in comparison with CII-treated group. The levels of SOD, 
GSH and Zn were significantly increased, but the levels of PGE2, NO and CP were 
significantly decreased in the vitamin E treated group in comparison with 
CII-treated group. The levels of PGE2, LPO, Cu and Zn were significantly lower 
in vitamin E treated group than Allo-treated group. In conclusion, the study 
suggests that proper antioxidant intake management may reduce free radical 
generation and improve antioxidant status in RA. Allopurinol and vitamins E may 
effectively normalize in different degrees the impaired the oxidant/antioxidant 
system and may be useful in delaying the complication of RA. Moreover, they 
display anti-inflammatory action by decreasing PGE2 level in RA.
