OBJECTIVE: Cytosolic phospholipase A2 (cPLA2) is a rate-limiting enzyme that 
plays a critical role in the biosynthesis of eicosanoids. The aim of this study 
was to investigate the mechanisms underlying interleukin-1β (IL-1β)-induced 
cPLA2 expression in human rheumatoid arthritis synovial fibroblasts (RASFs).
METHODS: Synovial tissue was obtained from patients with RA who were undergoing 
joint replacement surgery. In a mouse model of IL-1β-mediated inflammatory 
arthritis, neutrophil infiltration, bone erosion, and cPLA2 expression in ankle 
synovium were analyzed by immunohistochemistry. IL-1β-induced cPLA2 expression 
was determined by Western blotting, real-time polymerase chain reaction, and 
gene promoter assay using pharmacologic inhibitors and transfection with short 
hairpin RNAs or small interfering RNAs. The recruitment of NF-κB and p300 to the 
cPLA2 promoter was determined by chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. 
Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) biosynthesis was evaluated by enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay.
RESULTS: IL-1β-induced cPLA2 expression and PGE2 release were mediated through a 
myeloid differentiation factor 88 (MyD88)/c-Src-dependent matrix 
metalloproteinase (MMP)/heparin-binding epidermal growth factor (HB-EGF) cascade 
linking to transactivation of the EGF receptor (EGFR)/phosphatidylinositol 
3-kinase (PI 3-kinase)/Akt, p300, and NF-κB p65 pathways. IL-1β also stimulated 
Akt phosphorylation and nuclear translocation. Activation of Akt eventually led 
to the acetylation of histone residues by phosphorylation and recruitment of 
p300 and enhanced its histone acetyltransferase activity on the NF-κB elements 
of the cPLA2 promoter. IL-1β-induced NF-κB transcriptional activity was mediated 
through a PI 3-kinase/Akt-dependent cascade. Up-regulation of cPLA2 by IL-1β 
increased PGE(2) biosynthesis in RASFs.
CONCLUSION: IL-1β-induced cPLA2 expression is mediated through activation of the 
MyD88/c-Src, MMP/HB-EGF, EGFR/PI 3-kinase/Akt, p300, and NF-κB pathways. These 
results provide insights into the mechanisms underlying IL-1β-enhanced joint 
inflammatory responses in RA and may inspire new targeted therapeutic 
approaches.
