Optical fluorescence imaging is increasingly used to monitor biological 
functions of specific targets in small animals (1-3). However, the intrinsic 
fluorescence of biomolecules poses a problem when fluorophores that absorb 
visible light (350–700 nm) are used. Near-infrared (NIR) fluorescence (700–1,000 
nm) detection avoids the background fluorescence interference of natural 
biomolecules, providing a high contrast between target and background tissues. 
NIR fluorophores have a wider dynamic range and minimal background as a result 
of reduced scattering compared with visible fluorescence detection. They also 
have high sensitivity, resulting from low infrared background, and high 
extinction coefficients, which provide high quantum yields. The NIR region is 
also compatible with solid-state optical components, such as diode lasers and 
silicon detectors. NIR fluorescence imaging is becoming a noninvasive 
alternative to radionuclide imaging in small animals (4, 5). Photoacoustic 
imaging (PAI) is an emerging hybrid biomedical imaging modality based on the 
photoacoustic effect. In PAI, non-ionizing optical pulses are delivered into 
biological tissues. Some of the delivered energy is absorbed and converted into 
heat, leading to transient thermoelastic expansion and thus ultrasonic emission. 
The generated ultrasonic waves are then detected by ultrasonic transducers to 
form images. It is known that optical absorption is closely associated with 
physiological properties, such as hemoglobin concentration and oxygen 
saturation. As a result, the magnitude of the ultrasonic emission (i.e., 
photoacoustic signal), which is proportional to the local energy deposition, 
reveals physiologically specific optical absorption contrast and tissue 
structures. However, exogenous NIR contrast agents are necessary to overcome the 
intrinsic low tissue- and hemoglobin- absorption and scattering of tissue. On 
the other hand, these small molecules exhibit fast clearance, small optical 
absorption cross section, and non-targeted specificity. Therefore, there is a 
need for contrast agents with long blood circulation and targeted specificity. 
Gold (Au) nanoparticles have been studied as molecular imaging agents because of 
their bright NIR fluorescence emission of 700–900 nm and low toxicity (6, 7). 
They can be tuned to emit in a range of wavelengths by changing their sizes, 
shapes, and composition, thus providing broad excitation profiles and high 
absorption coefficients. They can be coated and capped with hydrophilic 
materials for additional conjugation with biomolecules, such as peptides, 
antibodies, nucleic acids, and small organic compounds for in vitro and in vivo 
studies. Au nanoparticles have been approved by the United States Food and Drug 
Administration for the treatment of patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Au 
nanoparticles have been studied as contrast agents in X-ray/computed tomography, 
NIR optical coherence tomography, PAI, and photoacoustic tomography (PAT) (8). 
NIR Au nanocages (AuNCs) are biocompatible, have low toxicity, and are tunable 
to strong NIR absorption (9). They have an outer edge of ~50 nm and an inner 
edge of ~42 nm, with a wall thickness of ~4 nm. Yang et al. (10) have performed 
PAT of the cerebral cortex of rats with poly(ethylene glycol)-coated AuNCs 
(PEG-AuNCs) as an optical contrast agent. The investigators observed an enhanced 
optical contrast in the vasculature in the cerebral cortex. Song et al. (11) 
demonstrated the use of Au nanocages as a PAI probe for detection of sentinel 
lymph nodes in rats. Malignant melanoma is the deadliest form of skin cancer 
(12). Early and accurate diagnosis is necessary for surgery and successful 
treatment (13). The melanocortin (MC) system is a neuropeptide network of the 
skin, and it is involved in pigmentation regulation, cortisol production, and 
many other physiological processes (14). Most cutaneous cell types express MC 
receptors, proopiomelanocortin (POMC), and prohormone convertases, and they also 
release MCs. However, these receptors have been found to be overexpressed in 
melanoma cells. There are five MC receptors (MC1R to MC5R), which belong to the 
G-protein−coupled receptor superfamily. Melanotropin-stimulating hormones (α-, 
β-, and γ-MSH) are derived from POMC by the proteolytic action of prohormone 
convertases. α-MSH 
(Ac-Ser1-Tyr2-Ser3-Met4-Glu5-His6-Phe7-Arg8-Trp9-Gly10-Lys11-Pro12-Val13-NH2), 
produced by the brain and pituitary gland, is a tridecapeptide (13 amino acids) 
and is the most potent melanotropic peptide (15) in the regulation of skin 
pigmentation via MC1R. Radiolabeled α-MSH peptide analogs have been shown to 
specifically bind to MC1R, which is overexpressed on human and mouse melanoma 
cells (16-20). Kim et al. (21) have evaluated [Nle4,d-Phe7]-α-MSH-PEG-AuNCs for 
in vivo PAT imaging of melanomas in mice.
