OBJECTIVE: To establish a rat model of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) with kidney 
deficiency syndrome.
METHODS: A total of 110 six-week-old specific pathogen-free male and female 
Sprague-Dawley rats were randomly divided into normal control group, 
sham-operated group, collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) control group, castration 
plus CIA group and hydroxyurea plus CIA group. Testiculus or ovary of rats in 
the castration plus CIA group was cut off, respectively. Rats in the hydroxyurea 
plus CIA group were given 375 mg/(kg·d) hydroxyurea by gavage administration for 
17 d. Then rats in the CIA control group, castration plus CIA group and 
hydroxyurea plus CIA group were subcutaneously injected with mixture of type II 
collagen and incomplete Freund's adjuvant to induce rheumatoid arthritis. 
General state, arthritis index and joint swelling of the rats were observed to 
evaluate the onset of CIA. Contents of anti-type II collagen antibody, 
interleukin-6 (IL-6), IL-10, interferon-γ (IFN-γ) and corticosterone (CORT) in 
plasma were detected by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, and adrenal cyclic 
adenylic acid (cAMP) and cyclic guanylic acid (cGMP) levels were detected by 
radioimmunoassay.
RESULTS: Compared with the CIA control group, the degrees of joint swelling and 
joint damage were significantly increased in the kidney-deficiency CIA rats 
(castration plus CIA group and hydroxyurea plus CIA group), with kidney 
deficiency syndrome similar to human clinical symptoms, such as depressed, bowed 
back, dullness, reduced diet and perianal contamination; the rats in those two 
groups were noted with a significantly decreased ratio of cAMP/cGMP; the content 
of CORT was increased in male rats while decreased in female rats, with an 
obvious increase in the content of anti-type II collagen antibody; the contents 
of IFN-γ, IL-6 and IL-10 were obviously increased in the castration plus CIA 
group.
CONCLUSION: The rat model of RA with kidney deficiency syndrome has both obvious 
kidney deficiency syndrome and characteristics of RA and can reflect part of the 
patient's characteristics. However, castration is more suitable for inducing RA 
with kidney deficiency syndrome in rats.
