OBJECTIVE: Cia3 is a locus on rat chromosome 4 that regulates severity and joint 
damage in collagen- and pristane-induced arthritis (CIA and PIA). This study was 
undertaken to refine the Cia3 gene-containing interval toward gene 
identification and obtain insights into its mode of action.
METHODS: Five DA.F344(Cia3) subcongenic rat strains were generated and studied 
using the PIA and CIA models. Levels of antibodies against type II collagen 
(both allo- and autoantibodies) were measured. Joints and synovial tissue were 
collected 32 days after the induction of PIA (chronic stage) for histologic and 
quantitative polymerase chain reaction analysis of interleukin-1β (IL-1β) and 
matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) levels.
RESULTS: Three subcongenic strains sharing the centromeric Cia3d interval were 
protected and 2 subcongenic strains sharing the telomeric Cia3g interval, which 
did not overlap with Cia3d, were also protected, developing significantly less 
severe CIA and PIA. Normal joint architecture was preserved in DA.F344(Cia3) and 
DA.F344(Cia3d) congenic rats with PIA, while DA rats had pronounced synovial 
hyperplasia, angiogenesis, inflammatory infiltration, and bone or cartilage 
erosions. The DA.F344(Cia3d) and DA.F344(Cia3g) strains had significantly lower 
synovial levels of IL-1β (5-fold and nearly 2-fold, respectively [the latter not 
reaching statistical significance]), MMP-1 (expressed predominantly in DA rats), 
MMP-3 (79-fold and 8-fold, respectively), and MMP-14 (21-fold and 1.4-fold, 
respectively) and reduced levels of pathogenic autoantibodies against type II 
collagen, compared with DA rats.
CONCLUSION: We have identified 2 new arthritis severity and articular damage 
loci within Cia3. These loci regulate pathogenic processes in 2 different models 
of rheumatoid arthritis, and the identification of these genes has the potential 
to generate new targets for therapies aimed at reducing disease severity and 
articular damage, and may additionally have prognostic value.
