Rheumatoid arthritis is a chronic inflammatory disease affecting approximately 
1% of the population and is characterized by cartilage and bone destruction 
ultimately leading to loss of joint function. Early detection and intervention 
of disease provides the best hope for successful treatment and preservation of 
joint mobility and function. Reliable and non-invasive techniques that 
accurately measure arthritic disease onset and progression are lacking. We 
recently developed a novel agent, SapC-DOPS, which is composed of the 
membrane-associated lysosomal protein saposin C (SapC) incorporated into 
1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phospho-L-serine (DOPS) lipid nanovesicles. SapC-DOPS 
has a high fusogenic affinity for phosphatidylserine-enriched microdomains on 
surfaces of target cell membranes. Incorporation of a far-red fluorophore, 
CellVue Maroon (CVM), into the nanovesicles allows for in vivo non-invasive 
visualization of the agent in targeted tissue. Given that phosphatidylserine is 
present only on the inner leaflet of healthy plasma membranes but is "flipped" 
to the outer leaflet upon cell damage, we hypothesized that SapC-DOPS would 
target tissue damage associated with inflammatory arthritis due to local 
surface-exposure of phosphatidylserine. Optical imaging with SapC-DOPS-CVM in 
two distinct models of arthritis, serum-transfer arthritis (e.g., K/BxN) and 
collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) revealed robust SapC-DOPS-CVM specific 
localization to arthritic paws and joints in live animals. Importantly, 
intensity of localized fluorescent signal correlated with macroscopic arthritic 
disease severity and increased with disease progression. Flow cytometry of cells 
extracted from arthritic joints demonstrated that SapC-DOPS-CVM localized to an 
average of 7-8% of total joint cells and primarily to CD11b+Gr-1+ cells. Results 
from the current studies strongly support the application of SapC-DOPS-CVM for 
advanced clinical and research applications including: detecting early arthritis 
onset, assessing disease progression real-time in live subjects, and providing 
novel information regarding cell types that may mediate arthritis progression 
within joints.
