OBJECTIVE: Inhibitors of p38 demonstrate limited benefit in rheumatoid arthritis 
(RA), perhaps due to the antiinflammatory functions of p38α. This study was 
performed to determine if selective deletion of p38α in macrophages affects the 
severity of arthritis and whether blocking upstream kinases in the p38 pathway, 
such as MKK-3 or MKK-6, avoids some of the limitations of p38 blockade.
METHODS: Wild-type (WT) mice and mice with selective deletion of p38α in 
macrophages (p38α(ΔLysM) ) were injected with K/BxN sera. Antigen-induced 
arthritis was also induced in p38α(ΔLysM) mice. Mouse joint extracts were 
evaluated by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, quantitative polymerase chain 
reaction (qPCR), and Western blot analysis. Bone marrow-derived macrophages 
(BMMs) were stimulated with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and were evaluated by qPCR 
and Western blotting. Bone marrow chimeras were generated using MKK-3(-/-) and 
MKK-6(-/-) mice, and K/BxN serum was administered to induce arthritis.
RESULTS: Compared to WT mice, p38α(ΔLysM) mice had increased disease severity 
and delayed resolution of arthritis, which correlated with higher synovial 
inflammatory mediator expression and ERK phosphorylation. In contrast to WT BMMs 
cultured in the presence of a p38α/β inhibitor, LPS-stimulated MKK-6- and 
MKK-3-deficient BMMs had suppressed LPS-mediated interleukin-6 (IL-6) expression 
but had normal IL-10 production, dual-specificity phosphatase 1 expression, and 
MAPK phosphorylation. WT chimeric mice with MKK-6- and MKK-3-deficient bone 
marrow had markedly decreased passive K/BxN arthritis severity.
CONCLUSION: Inhibiting p38α in a disease that is dominated by macrophage 
cytokines, such as RA, could paradoxically suppress antiinflammatory functions 
and interfere with clinical efficacy. Targeting an upstream kinase that 
regulates p38 could be more effective by suppressing proinflammatory cytokines 
while preventing decreased IL-10 expression and increased MAPK activation.
