Extracellular matrix (ECM) adhesion molecules consist of a complex network of 
fibronectins, collagens, chondroitins, laminins, glycoproteins, heparin sulfate, 
tenascins, and proteoglycans that surround connective tissue cells, and they are 
mainly secreted by fibroblasts, chondroblasts, and osteoblasts (1). Cell 
substrate adhesion molecules are considered essential regulators of cell 
migration, differentiation, and tissue integrity and remodeling. These molecules 
play a role in inflammation and atherogenesis, but they also participate in the 
process of invasion and metastasis of malignant cells in the host tissue (2). 
Tumor cells adhere to the ECM, which provides a matrix environment for 
permeation of tumor cells through the basal lamina and underlying interstitial 
stroma of the connective tissue. Overexpression of matrix metalloproteinases 
(MMPs) and other proteases by tumor cells allows intravasation of tumor cells 
into the circulatory system after degrading the basement membrane and ECM (3). 
Several families of MMPs are involved in atherogenesis, myocardial infarction, 
angiogenesis, and tumor invasion and metastases (4-7). MMP expression is highly 
regulated in normal cells, such as trophoblasts, osteoclasts, neutrophils, and 
macrophages. Elevated levels of MMPs have been found in tumors associated with a 
poor prognosis for cancer patients (8). There are four members of endogenous 
tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs), which regulate the activity of 
MMPs leading to inhibition of tumor growth and metastasis (9, 10). TIMP-2 
(TIMP2) is a bifunctional inhibitor of angiogenesis by inhibition of proteinase 
activity of MMPs and endothelial cell proliferation via binding to α3β1 (the 
N-terminal domain) and by MMP-independent anti-angiogenic activity (the 
C-terminal domain) (11, 12). Kang et al. (13) fused the N-terminal domain of 
TIMP2 to the C-terminus of human serum albumin (HSA) to form HSA/TIMP2 fusion 
protein (HSA-TIMP2), which is readily secreted by the transfected yeast 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. HSA-TIMP2 retains its anti-angiogenic activity at the 
C-terminal domain with little MMP inhibitory activity at the N-terminal domain. 
Lee et al. (14) have evaluated Cy5.5-HSA/TIMP2 (Cy5.5-HSA-TIMP2) for in vivo 
near-infrared (NIR) fluorescence imaging of rat prostate MLL tumors in nude mice 
showing maximum tumor accumulation at 2 d after injection. Integrins are a 
family of heterodimeric glycoproteins on cell surfaces that mediate diverse 
biological events involving cell–cell and cell–matrix interactions (15). 
Integrins consist of an α and a β subunit and are important for cell adhesion 
and signal transduction. The αvβ3 integrin is the most prominent receptor 
affecting tumor growth, tumor invasiveness, metastasis, tumor-induced 
angiogenesis, inflammation, osteoporosis, and rheumatoid arthritis (16-21). 
Expression of the αvβ3 integrin is strong on tumor cells and activated 
endothelial cells, whereas expression is weak on resting endothelial cells and 
most normal tissues. The peptide sequence Arg-Gly-Asp (RGD) has been identified 
as a recognition motif used by extracellular matrix proteins (vitronectin, 
fibrinogen, laminin, and collagen) to bind to a variety of integrins, including 
αvβ3. The αvβ3 antagonists are being studied as anti-tumor and anti-angiogenic 
agents (18, 22, 23). Various radiolabeled RGD peptides (antagonists) have been 
introduced for imaging of tumors and tumor angiogenesis (24). Choi et al. (25) 
conjugated multiple c(RGDfK) peptides to HSA-TIMP2 to enhance the binding 
capacity of the protein (RGD-HSA-TIMP2) to tumors and their vasculatures. 
123I-RGD-HSA-TIMP2 and 123I-HSA-TIMP2 have been studied as potential 
single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) probes for imaging αvβ3 
receptors in nude mice bearing human glioblastoma U87MG tumors.
