Folic acid has been frequently exploited to target attached drugs to cells that 
overexpress a folate receptor (FR). Unfortunately, folic acid and folate-linked 
drugs bind equally well to both major isoforms of the FR-that is, FR-α, which is 
primarily expressed on malignant cells, and FR-β, which is upregulated on 
activated monocytes and macrophages. Because both major isoforms of FR can be 
expressed simultaneously in the same organism, folic acid cannot enable 
selective targeting of therapeutic and imaging agents to either tumor masses or 
sites of inflammation. In an effort to develop a targeting ligand that can 
selectively deliver attached imaging and therapeutic agents to tumor cells, we 
constructed a reduced and alkylated form of folic acid, N(5), N(10)-dimethyl 
tetrahydrofolate (DMTHF) that exhibits selectivity for FR-α.
METHODS: DMTHF-(99m)Tc was injected into mice bearing FR-α-expressing tumor 
xenografts and imaged by γ-scintigraphy. The selectivity for FR-α over FR-β in 
vivo was examined by γ-scintigraphic images of animal models of various 
inflammatory diseases such as apolipoprotein E-deficient mice with 
atherosclerosis, DBA/1 LacJ mice with induced arthritis, C57BL/6J mice with 
muscle injury, and BALB/C mice with both FR-α tumor and ulcerative colitis, by 
administration of equal doses of DMTHF-(99m)Tc and EC20-(99m)Tc. The uptake of 
radiochelates in various organs was quantified by biodistribution studies. 
DMTHF-near-infrared dye conjugate and DMTHF-Oregon green dye conjugates were 
synthesized and evaluated for FR-α selectivity over FR-β in rat peritoneal 
macrophages and human peripheral blood monocytes, respectively, by flow 
cytometry. Fluorescence-guided imaging was also performed using folate and DMTHF 
dye conjugates.
RESULTS: The new targeting ligand was found to bind malignant cells in mice with 
solid tumor xenografts but not peripheral blood monocytes or inflammatory 
macrophages in animal models of atherosclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis, muscle 
injury, or ulcerative colitis. Results from optical and radioimaging studies and 
biodistribution experiments confirm the differential specificity of this new 
ligand for malignant masses.
CONCLUSION: The new targeting ligand DMTHF enables selective noninvasive imaging 
and therapy of tumor tissues in the presence of inflammation.
