OBJECTIVE: To observe the effect of fire-needle intervention on serum IL-1 and 
TNF-alpha contents in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) rats so as to study its 
underlying mechanism in improving RA.
METHODS: A total of 40 Wistar rats were randomized into normal control, model, 
methotrexate (MTX, medication) group and fire-needle groups, with 10 cases in 
each group. RA model was established by injecting Freund's complete adjuvant 
(0.1 mL) into the rats' right hind paw. Fire-needle was applied to "Jiaji" (EX-B 
2),"Zusanli" (ST 36) and "Ashi point" (the most severe site of the swelling 
joint), once every three days and 8 times altogether. The rat's right hindpaw 
swelling volume was detected by volumetric method, and serum IL-1 and TNF-alpha 
contents were determined by double antibody sandwich ELISA. The pathological 
changes of synovium tissue of the right knee-joint were observed by optical 
microscope.
RESULTS: In comparison with the control group, the swollen paw volumes at 
time-points of 12 d, 19 d, 26 d and 33 d after modeling and serum IL-1 and 
TNF-alpha contents were increased significantly (P < 0.01). Compared to the 
model group, the swollen paw volumes on day 33 in both medication and 
fire-needle groups were decreased considerably (P < 0.01), while serum IL-1 and 
TNF-alpha contents in the medication and fire-needle groups were reduced 
significantly (P < 0.05, P < 0.01). No significant differences were found 
between the medication and fire-needle groups in the swollen paw volumes on day 
12 (P > 0.05). The pathological states (synovial cells' arrangement, 
inflammatory infiltration, synovial membrane thickening, etc.) of synovium 
tissue of the right knee-joint in both medication and fire-needle groups were 
relatively lighter than those of the model group.
CONCLUSION: Fire-needle therapy can down-regulate serum IL-1 and TNF-alpha 
contents in rheumatoid arthritis rats, and reduce the degree of arthroncus of 
the affected joint, which may contribute to its effect in improving synovial 
lesions.
