The amphibian bombesin (BBN or BN, a peptide of 14 amino acids) is an analog of 
human gastrin-releasing peptide (GRP, a peptide of 27 amino acids) that binds to 
GRP receptors (GRPR) with high affinity and specificity (1, 2). Both GRP and BBN 
share an amidated C-terminus sequence homology of seven amino acids, 
Trp-Ala-Val-Gly-His-Leu-Met-NH2. BBN-Like peptides have been shown to induce 
various biological responses in diverse tissues, including the central nervous 
system (CNS) and the gastrointestinal (GI) system. They also act as potential 
growth factors for both normal and neoplastic tissues (3). Specific BBN 
receptors (BBN-Rs) have been identified on CNS and GI tissues and on a number of 
tumor cell lines (4). The BBN-R superfamily includes at least four different 
subtypes, namely the GRPR subtype (BB2), the neuromedin B receptor subtype 
(BB1), the BB3 subtype, and the BB4 subtype. The findings of GRPR overexpression 
in various human tumors, such as breast, prostate, lung, colon, ovarian, and 
pancreatic cancers, provide opportunities for tumor imaging by designing 
specific molecular imaging agents to target the GRPR (5, 6). Integrins are a 
family of heterodimeric glycoproteins on cell surfaces that mediate diverse 
biological events involving cell–cell and cell–matrix interactions (7). 
Integrins consist of an α and a β subunit and are important for cell adhesion 
and signal transduction. The αvβ3 integrin is the most prominent receptor 
affecting tumor growth, tumor invasiveness, metastasis, tumor-induced 
angiogenesis, inflammation, osteoporosis, and rheumatoid arthritis (8-13). 
Expression of the αvβ3 integrin is strong on tumor cells and activated 
endothelial cells, whereas expression is weak on resting endothelial cells and 
most normal tissues. A peptide sequence consisting of Arg-Gly-Asp (RGD) has been 
identified as a recognition motif used by extracellular matrix proteins 
(vitronectin, fibrinogen, laminin, and collagen) to bind to a variety of 
integrins, including αvβ3. Various ligands have been introduced for imaging of 
tumors and tumor angiogenesis (14). Because breast and prostate cancers express 
both GRPR and αvβ3, Liu et al. (15) designed an RGD-BBN heterodimer in which 
BBN[7-14]NH2 and c(RGDyK) are connected with a glutamate linker (BBN on the Glu 
side chain γ-carboxylate group and RGD on the Glu side chain α-carboxylate 
group). 1,4,7-triazacyclononane-1,4-7-triacetic acid (NOTA) was used as a 
bifunctional chelator for labeling RGD-BBN to form 64Cu-NOTA-RGD-BBN for use in 
positron emission tomography (PET) imaging of αvβ3 and GRPR in nude mice bearing 
human tumors. For single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT), Liu et al. 
(16) conjugated Glu-RGD-BBN with 6-hydrazinonicotinyl (HYNIC) and labeled the 
product with 99mTc, using tricine and trisodium triphenylphosphine-trisulfonate 
(TPPTS) as the coligands. 99mTc-HYNIC-RGD-BBN was evaluated in C57/BL6 mice 
bearing mouse Lewis lung carcinomas (LLC).
