Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic destructive autoimmune disease 
characterised by periods of flare and remission. Today's treatment is based on 
continuous immunosuppression irrespective of the patient's inflammatory status. 
When the disease is in remission the therapy is withdrawn but withdrawal 
attempts often results in inflammatory flares, and re-start of the therapy is 
commenced when the inflammation again is prominent which leads both to suffering 
and increased risk of tissue destruction. An attractive alternative treatment 
would provide a disease-regulated therapy that offers increased 
anti-inflammatory effect during flares and is inactive during periods of 
remission. To explore this concept we expressed the immunoregulatory cytokine 
interleukin (IL)-10 gene under the control of an inflammation dependent promoter 
in a mouse model of RA - collagen type II (CII) induced arthritis (CIA). 
Haematopoetic stem cells (HSCs) were transduced with lentiviral particles 
encoding the IL-10 gene (LNT-IL-10), or a green fluorescence protein (GFP) as 
control gene (LNT-GFP), driven by the inflammation-dependent IL-1/IL-6 promoter. 
Twelve weeks after transplantation of transduced HSCs into DBA/1 mice, CIA was 
induced. We found that LNT-IL-10 mice developed a reduced severity of arthritis 
compared to controls. The LNT-IL-10 mice exhibited both increased mRNA 
expression levels of IL-10 as well as increased amount of IL-10 produced by B 
cells and non-B APCs locally in the lymph nodes compared to controls. These 
findings were accompanied by increased mRNA expression of the IL-10 induced 
suppressor of cytokine signalling 1 (SOCS1) in lymph nodes and a decrease in the 
serum protein levels of IL-6. We also found a decrease in both frequency and 
number of B cells and serum levels of anti-CII antibodies. Thus, 
inflammation-dependent IL-10 therapy suppresses experimental autoimmune 
arthritis and is a promising candidate in the development of novel treatments 
for RA.
