AIM: To investigate the effect of human umbilical cord stem cells, both 
mesenchymal and hematopoietic (CD34+), in the treatment of arthritis.
METHODS: Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) and hematopoietic (CD34+) stem cells 
(HSC) were isolated from human umbilical cord blood obtained from the umbilical 
cord of healthy pregnant donors undergoing full-term normal vaginal delivery. 
MSC, HSC, methotrexate (MTX) and sterile saline were injected intra-articularly 
into the rat hindpaw with complete freunds adjuvant (CFA) induced arthritis 
after the onset of disease (day 34), when arthritis had become well established 
(arthritis score ≥ 2). Arthritic indices were evaluated and the levels of 
interleukin (IL)-1, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α and interferon (IFN)-γ and 
anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10 in serum were determined using enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay. Animals of all groups were sacrificed 34 d after beginning 
treatment, except positive control (PC) which was sacrificed at 10, 21 and 34 d 
for microscopic observation of disease progression. We used hematoxylin, eosin 
and Masson's trichrome stains for histopathological examination of cartilage and 
synovium.
RESULTS: The mean arthritis scores were similar in all groups at 12 and 34 d 
post immunization, with no statistical significant difference. Upon the 
injection of stem cells (hematopoietic and mesenchymal), the overall arthritis 
signs were significantly improved around 21 d after receiving the injection and 
totally disappeared at day 34 post treatment in MSC group. Mean hindpaw diameter 
(mm) in the MSC rats was about half that of the PC and MTX groups (P = 0.007 and 
P = 0.021, respectively) and 0.6 mm less than the HSC group (P = 0.047), as 
indicated by paw swelling. Associated with these findings, serum levels of 
TNF-α, IFN-γ and IL-1 decreased significantly in HSC and MSC groups compared to 
PC and MTX groups (P < 0.05), while the expression of IL-10 was increased. 
Histopathological examination with H and E stain revealed that the MTX treated 
group showed significant reduction of leucocytic infiltrate and hypertrophy of 
the synovial tissue with moderate obliteration of the joint cavity. Stem cells 
treated groups (both hematopoietic CD34+ and mesenchymal), showed significant 
reduction in leucocytic infiltrate and hypertrophy of the synovial tissue with 
mild obliteration of the joint cavity. With Masson's trichrome, stain sections 
from the PC group showed evidence of vascular edema of almost all vessels within 
the synovium in nearly all arthritic rats. Vacuoles were also visible in the 
outer vessel wall. The vessel became hemorrhagic and finally necrotic. In 
addition, there was extensive fibrosis completely obliterating the joint cavity. 
The mean color area percentage of collagen in this group was 0.324 ± 0.096, 
which was significantly increased when compared to the negative control group. 
The mean color area percentage of collagen in hematopoietic CD34+ and 
mesenchymal groups was 0.176 ± 0.0137 and 0.174 ± 0.0197 respectively, which 
showed a marked decrement compared to the PC group, denoting a mild increase in 
synovial tissue collagen fibers.
CONCLUSION: MSC enhance the efficacy of CFA-induced arthritis treatment, most 
likely through the modulation of the expression of cytokines and amelioration of 
pathological changes in joints.
