ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: The dried root of Litsea cubeba (Lour.) Pers. 
(Family Lauraceae) has long been used as a folk remedy in Traditional Chinese 
Medicine (TCM) and Dai Ethnopharmacy for the treatment of rheumatic diseases in 
southwestern China.
AIM OF THE STUDY: This study investigated the preventive efficacy of Litsea 
cubeba root in treating rheumatoid arthritis using Freund's complete adjuvant 
(CFA) induced arthritis (AA) in rat model.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Arthritis was induced in male Wistar rats by immunization 
with CFA. Ethanol extract (EELC) and water extract (WELC) of Litsea cubeba root 
both at 50mg/kg and 200mg/kg were orally administered from a day after the 
induction of arthritis. Paw swelling, arthritic score, body weight growth rate, 
index of thymus and spleen were observed, and the production of TNF-α, IL-1β, 
IL-6 and IL-10 in serum were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. The 
expression levels of inflammatory enzymes like cyclooxygenase and lipoxygenase 
were also measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Moreover, histological 
changes in the ankle joint were analyzed in AA rats.
RESULTS: Both EELC and WELC significantly suppressed paw swelling and arthritic 
score, increased the loss in body weight and decreased the index of thymus. 
Histopathological improvement in joint architecture was also observed in EELC, 
WELC-treated AA rats. The expression levels of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and 
5-lipoxygenase (5-LOX) were decreased on treatment with EELC and WELC. 
Furthermore, the overproduction of TNF-α, IL-1β and IL-6 were remarkably 
attenuated in serum of all Litsea cubeba-treated rats, however, IL-10 was 
markedly increased at doses of 50mg/kg of EELC and WELC.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that extract of Litsea cubeba root 
significantly attenuates adjuvant arthritis in rats by decreasing the levels of 
TNF-α, IL-1β and IL-6 and increasing of IL-10 in serum as well as down-regulate 
the levels of inflammatory enzymes such as COX-2 and 5-LOX. This suggests that 
Litsea cubeba root might be used as a therapeutic agent for the treatment of 
human arthritis.
