OBJECTIVE: To explore the therapeutic effect and safety of fire needling on rat 
with rheumatoid arthritis.
METHODS: Forty female Wistar rats were randomly divided into a normal group, a 
model group, a methotrexate (MTX) group and a fire needling group, 10 rats in 
each group. The 0.1 mL of normal saline was subcutaneously injected in rat's 
right back paw in the normal group, while the other groups received subcutaneous 
injection of 0.1 mL of complete Freund's adjuvant to establish the model. The 
pricking method was applied in the fire needling group at "Jiaji" (EX-B 2), 
"Zusanli" (ST 36) and Ashi points with a depth of 5 mm, once every three days, 
and totally eight times were required. In the MTX group, with intragastric 
administration of 2.0 mg/kg per rat, the treatment was given once every seven 
days, and totally four times were required. The weight, swelling rate of foot, 
joint pain score and polyarthritis index of rats in each group as well as the 
pathological change of liver tissue under light microscope were observed.
RESULTS: The weight, swelling rate of foot, joint pain score and polyarthritis 
index in the model group were significantly higher than those in the normal 
group (P < 0.05, P < 0.01), after the treatment, the above-mentioned indexes in 
the two treatment groups were obviouly dereased as componed with those in the 
model group (all P < 0.01), and there were statistical differences between the 
fire needling group and MTX group (P < 0.05, P < 0.01). Compared with the normal 
group, inflammatory cells were appeared with a cluster distribution in the liver 
cells of rats in the model group. The inflammatory cells were reduced in the MTX 
group and fire needling group, and liver cells had degenerative edema and cell 
nucleus were largen and deformed in the MTX group.
CONCLUSION: The fire needling has significant efficacy for rats with adjuvant 
arthritis (AA) without any damage to the liver, which coud have a better control 
of disease progression of rheumatoid arthritis .
