ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE AND AIM OF THE STUDY: Wen Luo Yin (WLY) is a 
traditional Chinese formula, which has the traditional use of scattering cold 
pathogen, draining dampness, freeing the flow of network vessels and relieving 
pains. It is extensively used in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) 
patients for more than 2000 years, but its actions on angiogenesis of RA have 
not been clarified. The present study aims to determine the anti-angiogenic 
activity of WLY on collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) rat model and in human 
fibroblast-like synoviocytes of RA (HFLS-RA) and human umbilical vein 
endothelial cells (HUVEC).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: For in vivo experiment, arthritis was induced by 
immunization with bovine II collagen in DA rats. Treatment with WLY (3.45, 6.9, 
13.8 g/kg, p.o., daily), or vehicle began from day 1 to day 28 of first 
immunization. The arthritis score, arthritis incidence, microfocal computed 
tomography analysis and histopathology evaluation of inflamed joints were 
assessed. Angiogenesis was measured by synovial vessel density with 
immunohistochemistry and histomorphometric analysis in synovial membrane tissues 
of joints. For in vitro experiments, HFLS-RA and HUVEC were used. Assays to 
determine HFLS-RA migration and adhesion were performed in the presence of 
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)165 or interleukin (IL)-1β and/or the 
WLY (8, 16, 32 mg/ml). Angiogenesis was assessed by measuring the migration, 
adhesion, and tube formation of HUVEC. Further the effect of treatment with WLY 
on expression levels of angiogenic activators in sera of CIA rats and in 
IL-1β-induced HFLS-RA were evaluated by enzyme linked immunosorbent assay.
RESULTS: WLY significantly decreased the arthritis score and arthritis 
incidence, and inhibited inflammation, pannus formation, cartilage and bone 
destruction of inflamed joints in CIA rats. More interestingly, doses of 
3.45-13.8 g/kg WLY could markedly reduce the capillaries, small, medium and 
large vessel density in synovial membrane tissues of inflamed joints. Moreover, 
WLY suppressed the VEGF-induced chemotactic migration of HFLS-RA and HUVEC, and 
inhibited matrigel-induced cell adhesion of them. It also disrupted tube 
formation of HUVEC on matrigel. Furthermore, WLY significantly reduced the 
expression of angiogenic activators including tumor necrosis factor-α, IL-1β, 
IL-17, VEGF, VEGFR, angiopoietin (Ang)-1, Ang-2 and Ang-2 receptor in sera of 
CIA rats and/or in IL-1β-induced HFLS-RA/HUVEC.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest for the first time that WLY posses the 
anti-angiogenic effect in RA both in vivo and in vitro by downregulating 
angiogenic activators.
