15-deoxy-Δ(12,14)-prostaglandin J2 (15d-PGJ2) is an anti-inflammatory downstream 
product of the cyclooxygenase enzymes. It has been implicated to play a 
protective role in a variety of inflammatory mediated diseases, including 
rheumatoid arthritis, neural damage, and myocardial infarctions. Here we show 
that 15d-PGJ2 also plays a role in Salmonella infection. Salmonella enterica 
Typhimurium is a Gram-negative facultative intracellular pathogen that is able 
to survive and replicate inside phagocytic immune cells, allowing for bacterial 
dissemination to systemic sites. Salmonella species cause a wide range of 
morbidity and mortality due to gastroenteritis and typhoid fever. Previously we 
have shown that in mouse models of typhoid fever, Salmonella infection causes a 
major perturbation in the prostaglandin pathway. Specifically, we saw that 
15d-PGJ2 production was significantly increased in both liver and feces. In this 
work we show that 15d-PGJ2 production is also significantly increased in 
macrophages infected with Salmonella. Furthermore, we show that the addition of 
15d-PGJ2 to Salmonella infected RAW264.7, J774, and bone marrow derived 
macrophages is sufficient to significantly reduce bacterial colonization. We 
also show evidence that 15d-PGJ2 is reducing bacterial uptake by macrophages. 
15d-PGJ2 reduces the inflammatory response of these infected macrophages, as 
evidenced by a reduction in the production of cytokines and reactive nitrogen 
species. The inflammatory response of the macrophage is important for full 
Salmonella virulence, as it can give the bacteria cues for virulence. The 
reduction in bacterial colonization is independent of the expression of 
Salmonella virulence genes SPI1 and SPI2, and is independent of the 15d-PGJ2 
ligand PPAR-γ. 15d-PGJ2 also causes an increase in ERK1/2 phosphorylation in 
infected macrophages. In conclusion, we show here that 15d-PGJ2 mediates the 
outcome of bacterial infection, a previously unidentified role for this 
prostaglandin.
