BACKGROUND: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a systemic autoimmune disorder that 
involves inflammation and pain of joints. Low-level laser irradiation is being 
evaluated for treating RA, however, the effectiveness of linear polarized near 
infrared light (SuperLizer; SL) irradiation is unclear.
AIM: It has been reported that interleukin 6 (IL-6) plays a key role in the 
progression of RA. In our previous study, using DNA microarray analysis, we 
examined the gene expression profiling of human rheumatoid fibroblast-like 
synoviocyte MH7A in response to IL-1ß administration and SL irradiation. As a 
result, IL-6 was listed in altered gene as increased by IL-1ß and decreased by 
SL irradiation.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The reduction of IL-6 gene expression in MH7A by SL 
irradiation was confirmed by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction 
(RT-PCR) and real-time PCR. Effect of SL irradiation on the RA inflammation in 
the collagen induced arthritis (CIA) rats was also studied by measuring 
temperature. IL-6 production in knee joint of rats was analyzed by 
immunohisto-chemistry.
RESULTS: Scatter plot analysis demonstrated that an increase in IL-6 gene 
expression by IL-1ß was reduced by SL irradiation. The reduction of IL-6 mRNA 
level by SL irradiation was successfully confirmed by RT-PCR and real-time PCR. 
SL irradiation treated CIA rat decreased the temperature of knee joints. The 
immunohistochemical analysis demonstrated a strong IL-6 staining in synovial 
membrane tissue of CIA rat joint, and SL irradiation significantly reduced the 
staining.
DISCUSSION: Since IL-6 has been identified to be an important proinflarnmatory 
cytokine in the pathogenesis of RA, the reduction of IL-6 expression is one of 
mechanisms in reduction of inflammation in RA joints by SL irradiation 
suggesting that SL irradiation may be useful for RA therapy.
CONCLUSION: SL irradiation reduced IL-6 gene expression in MH7A, and reduced 
inflammation and IL-6 protein expression in knee joint of CIA rats.
