OBJECTIVE: Shark type II collagen (SCII) is extracted as a glycoprotein from the 
cartilage of blue shark (Prionace glauca). We aim to confirm the effects of oral 
tolerance of SCII on inflammatory and immune responses to the ankle joint of 
rheumatoid-arthritis rats induced by Complete Freund's Adjuvant (CFA).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The onset of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) was observed 14 ± 
x days after injection of CFA. Rats in the control group were treated with 
acetic acid by oral administration (0.05 mmol kg-1d-1, days 14-28), while rats 
in experimental groups were treated by oral administration with SCII (1 or 3 mg 
kg-1d-1, days 14-28), Tripterygium wilfordii polyglycosidium (TWP) (10 mg 
kg-1d-1, days 14-28), and bovine type II collagen from US (US-CII) (1 mg 
kg-1d-1, days 14-28), respectively. The severity of arthritis was evaluated by 
the articular swelling. The immunological indexes observed included delayed type 
hypersensitivity (DTH) reaction, the level of interleukins 10 (IL-10) in rat 
blood serum and morphological characterization. Mixed lymphocyte culture (MLC) 
was performed to investigate the relationship between T cell apoptosis and 
specific immune tolerance induced by SCII.
RESULTS: Treatment with SCII for 2 weeks significantly attenuated the acute 
inflammation. The rats orally administrated with SCII at the level of 3 mg 
kg-1d-1 (SCII 3) and US-CII had decreased DTH reaction compared with rats in 
control group. Rats treated with SCII 3 had the highest level of IL-10 with 102 
pg/mL. SCII with concentration of 10 μg/L could help to significantly enhance 
level of Fas/Apo-1 in T cell in vitro. The result of histological staining 
indicated that the recovery of the articular membranes of ankle joint in SCII 3 
group was greatly enhanced.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that appropriate dose of SCII can not only 
ameliorate symptoms but also modify the disease process of 
Complete-Freunds-Adjuvant-induced arthritis. Oral administration of SCII might 
be a potential candidate as a novel drug for further investigation.
