INTRODUCTION: The application of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) in treating 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) has been made possible by the immunosuppressive and 
differentiation abilities of these cells. A non-invasive means of assessing cell 
integration and bio-distribution is fundamental in evaluating the risks and 
success of this therapy, thereby enabling clinical translation. This paper 
defines the use of superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles (SPIONs) in 
conjunction with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to image and track MSCs in 
vivo within a murine model of RA.
METHODS: Murine MSCs (mMSCs) were isolated, expanded and labelled with SiMAG, a 
commercially available particle. In vitro MRI visibility thresholds were 
investigated by labelling mMSCs with SiMAG with concentrations ranging from 0 to 
10 μg/ml and resuspending varying cell doses (10930 to 5 × 10950 cells) in 2 
mg/ml collagen prior to MR-imaging. Similarly, in vivo detection thresholds were 
identified by implanting 3 × 10950 mMSCs labelled with 0 to 10 μg/ml SiMAG 
within the synovial cavity of a mouse and MR-imaging. Upon RA induction, 300,000 
mMSCs labelled with SiMAG (10 μg/ml) were implanted via intra-articular 
injection and joint swelling monitored as an indication of RA development over 
seven days. Furthermore, the effect of SiMAG on cell viability, proliferation 
and differentiation was investigated.
RESULTS: A minimum particle concentration of 1 μg/ml (300,000 cells) and cell 
dose of 100,000 cells (5 and 10 μg/ml) were identified as the in vitro MRI 
detection threshold. Cell viability, proliferation and differentiation 
capabilities were not affected, with labelled populations undergoing successful 
differentiation down osteogenic and adipogenic lineages. A significant decrease 
(P < 0.01) in joint swelling was measured in groups containing SiMAG-labelled 
and unlabelled mMSCs implying that the presence of SPIONs does not affect the 
immunomodulating properties of the cells. In vivo MRI scans demonstrated good 
contrast and the identification of SiMAG-labelled populations within the 
synovial joint up to 7 days post implantation. This was further confirmed using 
histological analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: We have been able to monitor and track the migration of stem cell 
populations within the rheumatic joint in a non-invasive manner. This manuscript 
goes further to highlight the key characteristics (biocompatible and the ability 
to create significant contrast at realistic doses within a clinical relevant 
system) demonstrated by SiMAG that should be incorporated into the design of a 
new clinically approved tracking agent.
