BACKGROUND: Safety of the combination of leflunomide and methotrexate was 
examined in several studies with inconclusive results. The present study was 
designed to compare the efficacy and safety of the combination of leflunomide 
and methotrexate in adjuvant-induced arthritis (AIA) in rats focusing on 
immunosuppressive and hepatotoxic effects.
METHODS: Eighty four rats were divided into seven groups. Group 1: Sham control, 
group 2: the vehicle control, group 3: methotrexate group, group 4-5: 
leflunomide (5 and 10mg/kg/day) groups, group 6-7: combination 1 and 2 
[methotrexate+leflunomide (5 and 10mg/kg/day)] groups, respectively.
RESULTS: The current results indicated that combination therapies improved the 
ankle circumference and clinical scores compared to monotherapies; 
histopathological examination confirmed these findings. The myelosuppressive 
effect of leflunomide (10mg/kg/day) was comparable to that produced by 
methotrexate as indicated by the complete blood count and bone marrow 
cellularity; however their combination resulted in greater toxicity. 
Furthermore, methotrexate greatly affected the splenic histopathology compared 
to leflunomide and the combination therapy produced a greater effect compared to 
leflunomide not methotrexate. Differently, assessment of the hepatotoxic 
potential of the two drugs highlighted that leflunomide induced a dose-dependent 
increase in the fibrosis score which was higher in their magnitude than that 
induced by methotrexate. Leflunomide (10mg/kg/day) and combination 2 groups 
showed the greatest degree of liver fibrosis.
CONCLUSIONS: In rats with AIA, current drug combinations provided higher 
therapeutic benefit compared to monotherapies, however, greater toxicities were 
observed. Therefore, continuous monitoring of hematologic parameters and liver 
function will be recommended in clinical settings.

Copyright © 2014 Institute of Pharmacology, Polish Academy of Sciences. 
Published by Elsevier Urban & Partner Sp. z o.o. All rights reserved.
