AIM: Clematis terniflora DC. has been widely used as a traditional Chinese 
medicine for the treatment of tonsillitis, rheumatoid arthritis, and 
prostatitis. Despite its widespread use in China, there are currently no studies 
systematically examined its therapeutic effects and mechanism of action. As 
such, the present study was conducted to evaluate the anti-inflammatory, 
antinociceptive, and immunomodulatory effects of C. terniflora DC. using rodent 
and cellular models.
METHODS: The anti-inflammatory properties of the 70% ethanol eluted fraction of 
the 70% ethanol extract of C. terniflora DC. (EECTD) were evaluated using the 
xylene-induced ear swelling test, the carrageenan-induced edema model, and the 
cotton pellet granuloma method. Its antinociceptive activities were determined 
using both the acetic acid-induced writhing test and the hot plate assay. In 
parallel, we conducted an in vitro assay in LPS-induced RAW264.7 cells to 
examine the anti-inflammatory effects of EECTD and its purified form, 
aurantiamide acetate (AA) on inhibition of nitric oxide (NO) and prostaglandin 
E2 (PGE2) release.
RESULTS: EECTD (300mg/kg) significantly reduced the number of writhing, extended 
the pain response latency, and suppressed xylene-induced ear swelling. Each 
EECTD treatment group also had significant inhibition of cotton granulation 
formation in addition to reduced carrageenan-induced paw edema. EECTD was also 
shown to alleviate signs of inflammation in histopathological paw sections. 
However, it had a less noticeable effect on mouse ear swelling in the delayed 
type hypersensitivity test. A purified compound was isolated from EECTD and its 
structure was identified as AA. In vitro experimental results showed that both 
EECTD and AA were able to significantly inhibit the release of pro-inflammatory 
cytokines NO and PGE2 on LPS-induced RAW264.7 cells.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that EECTD has significant anti-inflammatory 
and antinociceptive activities, partially related to one of the active 
substances identified as AA. We hypothesize that these effects are related to 
its ability to inhibit the production of cytokines NO and PGE2. However, further 
work will be needed to determine its exact mechanism of action.
