Dear Sir The thymus plays a crucial role in the context of cellmediated immunity 
in the differentiation of T lymphocytes, not only during the embryogenesis and 
fetal period but also during the adulthood, even after its involution 1,2,3. It 
has been proved, indeed, that thymectomy in adult rat entails a decrease of the 
T-lymphocite response to mitogens and eventually its abolition 4,5,6. The 
removal of the thymus can decrease the activity of T-helper cells but in the 
same time it might enhance the activity of T-suppressor whose function is 
depressed in autoimmune diseases 7. The therapeutic role of thymectomy is proved 
in Myasthenia Gravis even if the exact mechanism underlying its effect remains 
largely unknown. The role of thymectomy as a treatment of autoimmune diseases 
other than Myasthenia Gravis (i.e. sistemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid 
arthritis, autoimmune hemolytic anemia, multiple sclerosis) has been 
investigated but the results of these studies are questionable 7. Our aim is to 
evaluate the role of thymectomy in order to clarify whether it may be regarded 
not just as therapeuytic, but, on the contrary, as a factor paving the way to 
the onset of autoimmune diseases. Therefore, the relevant literature has been 
taken into account along our study. Thymus has an important role in regulating 
immune reaction through its control on T-cell differentiation of both T-helper 
and T-suppressor/cytotoxic cells. That is the reason why thymectomy produces a 
shift in autoimmune diseases with disregulation of the immune networks2. After 
thymectomy, indeed, an induction and an acceleration of autoimmune processes has 
been observed. A relevant work focusing on those mechanisms was written by Gerli 
et al1 . In their work, the authors consider the long term immunologic effects 
of therapeutic thymectomy in patients with Myasthenia Gravis comparing 16 
patients with Myasthenia Gravis and previous Thymectomy (at least 8 years 
before), 6 patients with Myasthenia Gravis and recent Thymectomy (<1year) and 13 
with Myasthenia Gravis non Thymectomized and 32 healthy subjects used as 
control. The study shows that the long term thymectomized patients had mild 
T-cell lymphopenia and an expansion of CD4+ and CD8+ cells. These serologic 
abnormalities were not detectable in not and recently thymectomized patients. 
Myasthenia Gravis and SLE are autoimmune disorders. They have positivity for 
antinuclear antibodies (ANA) and thymus hyperplasia. SLE is characterized by an 
alteration of the immune system that involves B cells and T lymphocites, 
resulting in polyclonal B cell activation and autoantybody production. The 
thymus deletes self-reactive T-cells with high avidity T-cell receptors for self 
antigens expressed in the thymus 8,9. This, hence, means that thymus has a 
protective role against autoimmunity. The prevalence of SLE in pts with 
Myasthenia Gravis has been reported 0,2%-2,7% 10. Cases in which the SLE has 
developed after thymectomy for Myasthenia Gravis have been reported in the 
literature, but there are also cases in which SLE developed before thymectomy in 
pts with both SLE and MG. Iwadate at al reported from a review of the literature 
in a period of 40 years (1963- 2004) 21 patients in whom LES developed after 
thymectomy. Their ages ranged from 11 to 66 years (mean 40.4 years) with SLE 
developing from 2 months to 13 years (mean 4.9 years) after thymectomy. 
Polyarthritis was the most common manifestation of SLE 11. The proof that 
thymectomy can facilitate the development of SLE can be traced in the cases 
reported by the literature. The prevalence of SLE among patients with thymoma 
varies between 1,5 and 10% 12. Boonen et al identified in a period of 20 years 
(1975-1998) 18 new cases of thymoma and SLE. In 39% of the patients SLE was 
diagnosed before detection of thymoma. In 33% of the patients, thymoma and SLE 
was found simultaneously and in 28% SLE was discovered after thymoma. In five 
cases thymectomy had no clear effect on SLE. In two cases an exacerbation was 
reported and in one case SLE was attenuated 11,13. However, Vaiopoulos et al 14 
described in a series of 28 patients with both LES and Myasthenia Gravis, 17 
cases in which LES developed before thymectomy.
CONCLUSIONS: Thymectomy may thus be a precipitating factor for the development 
of SLE due to the loss of central tolerance and the overproduction of 
antibodies. Therefore, after a thymectomy, it is important to perform a timely 
follow up of the patient.
