INTRODUCTION: Numerous observations indicate that rheumatoid arthritis (RA) has 
a bone marrow component. In parallel, local synovial changes depend on neuronal 
components of the peripheral sympathetic nervous system. Here, we wanted to 
analyze whether collagen II-induced arthritis (CIA) has an impact on number, 
adhesion, apoptosis, and proliferation of the macrophage subset of bone marrow 
cells and how alterations in neurotransmitter microenvironment affect these 
properties.
METHODS: Bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMMs) were isolated from Dark Agouti 
rats at different stages of CIA, and number, adhesion, caspase 3/7 activity, and 
proliferation were analyzed in the presence of acetylcholine (ACh), 
noradrenaline (NA), and vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP).
RESULTS: Opposed to enhanced CD11b(+) (cluster of differentiation 11b-positive) 
and EMR1(+) (epidermal growth factor-like module-containing mucin-like hormone 
receptor-like 1-positive) cells, characterizing the macrophage subset, in native 
bone marrow of rats with acute inflammatory arthritis, we found decreased 
numbers of CIA macrophages after enrichment and culture in comparison with 
healthy (control) animals. Adhesion studies revealed significantly reduced 
attachment to plastic in acute arthritis and collagen type I and fibronectin in 
chronic arthritis. Additionally, we found a strong reduction in proliferation of 
BMMs at CIA onset and in the chronic phase of CIA. Apoptosis remained 
unaffected. Neurotransmitter stimulation profoundly affected proliferation, 
adhesion, and apoptosis of BMMs from CIA and control rats, depending on disease 
time point. Cultured BMMs from CIA and control animals expressed 
neurotransmitter receptors for ACh, VIP and NA, but the expression profile 
seemed not to be affected by CIA.
CONCLUSIONS: Induction of CIA distinctly inhibits proliferation of BMMs in low- 
and non-inflammatory phases and reduces attachment to plastic at the acute 
inflammatory arthritis stage and adhesion to collagen I and fibronectin at the 
chronic stage. Influence of neurotransmitter stimulation on adhesion, apoptosis, 
and proliferation is altered by CIA depending on disease stage. We suggest an 
altered reactivity of BMMs to neurotransmitter stimulation caused by CIA and 
maybe also by aging.
