Focal adhesion kinase (FAK) is known to promote the proliferation, migration and 
survival of synovial cells and plays an important role in the occurrence, 
development and pathological process of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). The aim of 
the present study was to observe FAK changes in synovial cells of rats with 
collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) and after intervention with disease modifying 
anti-rheumatic drugs (DMARDs) alone or in combination in a CIA female SD rat 
model induced by collagen type II. The rats were randomized to 8 groups: normal 
control group, CIA model control group, methotrexate (MTX, 0.9 mg/kg/w) group, 
cyclophosphamide (CTX, 24 mg/kg/3 w) group, leflunomide (LEF, 1.2 mg/kg/d) 
group, MTX + CTX group, LEF + CTX group, and MTX + LEF group. They were 
intervened with DMARDs alone or in combination for six weeks. The experiment 
lasted a total of 9 weeks in vivo. Articular inflammation was measured during 
the process of drug intervention in terms of the degree of swelling degree in 
the right hind foot using a venire caliper. All animals were sacrificed by 
breaking the neck after 9 weeks. Then, the ankle was fixed, decalcified, 
embedded, and HE stained, and prepared into slices to observe pathological 
changes in the synovial tissue. FAK expression in synovial cells was assayed by 
immunohistochemistry and the mean optical density (OD) value was measured using 
the HPIAS-2000 image analysis system. It was found that FAK expression was 
negative in normal control group, positive in CIA model control group, and 
decreased in the three DMARD combination treatment groups significantly as 
compared with that in the three single-drug groups (P < 0.05). FAK expression in 
LEF + CTX group or MTX + CTX group decreased more significantly than that in MTX 
+ LEF group (P < 0.05), and there was no statistically significant difference 
between LEF + CTX and MTX + CTX groups. The arthritis index and pathological 
change in the synovial tissue in LEF + CTX group or MTX + CTX group were 
improved more significantly than those in MTX + LEF group or single-drug groups. 
Our results showed that FAK expression was positive in CIA rats, indicating that 
it played an important role in the pathogenesis of RA, and that intervention 
with DMARDs could reduce the FAK expression in synovial cells of CIA rats. We 
hope these findings would contribute to the treatment of RA and other rheumatic 
diseases by reducing adhesion, proliferation and migration of synovial cells and 
inhibiting the over-expression of FAK.
