BACKGROUND: Anoectochilus formosanus has been used as a Chinese folk medicine 
and is known as the "King of medicine" in Chinese society due to its versatile 
pharmacological effects such as anti-hypertension, anti-diabetes, anti-heart 
disease, anti-lung and liver diseases, anti-nephritis and anti-Rheumatoid 
arthritis. Kinsenoside is an essential and active compound of A. formosanus 
(Orchidaceae). However, the anti-arthritic activity of kinsenoside has still not 
been demonstrated. In the present study, we confirmed that the kinsenoside 
treatment rheumatoid arthritis induced by collagen-induced arthritis in mice.
METHODS: Male DBA/1 J mice were immunized by intradermal injection of 100 μg of 
type II collagen in CFA. Kinsenoside was administered orally at a dose of 100 
and 300 mg/kg once a day after 2nd booster injection. Paw swelling, arthritic 
score and histological change were measured. ELISA was used to measure cytokines 
including tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α), interleukin-10 (IL-10), 
interleukin-17 (IL-17) and interferon-γ (IFN-γ) in the splenocyte according to 
the manufacturer's instructions.
RESULTS: Compared with model group, kinsenoside significantly inhibited paw 
edema and decreased the arthritis score and disease incidence. Histopathological 
examination demonstrated that kinsenoside effectively protected bone and 
cartilage of knee joint from erosion, lesion and deformation versus those from 
the CIA group. Kinsenoside also decreased IL-1β, TNF-α, and MMP-9 expression, 
and increased the expression of IL-10 in inflamed joints. The administration of 
kinsenoside significantly suppressed levels of TNF-α, IFN-γ, and IL-17, but 
increased concentrations of IL-10 in the supernatants of each of the splenocytes 
in CIA mice compared with that in the H2O-treated mice with CIA. Using flow 
cytometric analysis, we demonstrated that kinsenoside increases the population 
of CD4(+)CD25(+) regulatory T cells, thereby inhibiting the Th1 cell and B cell 
populations. Anticollagen IgG1 and IgG2a levels decreased in the serum of 
kinsenoside-treated mice.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that the administration of kinsenoside 
effectively suppressed inflammatory mediators' production and bone erosion in 
mice with collagen-induced arthritis showing the potential as an anti-arthritis 
agent.
