Monocyte-to-macrophage differentiation plays a central role in the 
pathophysiology of rheumatoid arthritis (RA)-associated inflammation because it 
results in the secretions of various inflammatory mediators in inflamed 
synovium, and thus, this differentiation is viewed as a clinical target. We 
aimed to determine whether SIRT1 inhibits the differentiation of monocytes from 
RA patients into macrophages by suppressing PU.1 phosphorylation. Monocytes from 
synovial fluid of RA patients (RAMCs), THP-1 monocytes, and mouse bone 
marrow-derived monocytes (BMDCs) were studied. The phorbol 12-myristate 
13-acetate (PMA)-stimulated RA monocyte adherence was significantly inhibited by 
resveratrol (a SIRT1 activator), and this inhibition by resveratrol was 
prevented by pretreating cells with sirtinol (a SIRT1 inhibitor). Furthermore, 
resveratrol pretreatment inhibited PMA-induced expressions of macrophage surface 
markers (CD11b, CD14, and CD36) and PMA-induced NF-κB transcriptional activation 
and, thus, suppressed the secretions of proinflammatory cytokines (TNF-α, IL-1β, 
and IL-6). In SIRT1 transgenic (Tg) mice, monocyte differentiation was inhibited 
and NF-κB transcriptional activity was suppressed and the expressions of TNF-α, 
IL-1β, and IL-6 were decreased at the protein and mRNA levels versus control 
C57BL/6 mice. Furthermore, SIRT1 activation by resveratrol suppressed 
PMA-induced phosphorylation and the nuclear translocation of PU.1 and, thus, 
inhibited monocyte differentiation. In conclusion, SIRT1 appears to inhibit 
monocyte to macrophage differentiation by suppressing PU.1 phosphorylation and 
inflammatory signaling, which suggests SIRT1 plays a critical role in the 
regulation of synovial inflammation in RA.
KEY MESSAGE: SIRT1 overexpression inhibits monocyte to macrophage 
differentiation. SIRT1 suppresses PU.1 phosphorylation. Inactivation of PU.1 
phosphorylation inhibits monocyte differentiation. SIRT1 regulates inflammation 
by inhibiting NF-κB during monocyte differentiation.
