OBJECTIVE: Genetic variation in FOXO3 (tagged by rs12212067) has been associated 
with a milder course of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and shown to limit 
monocyte-driven inflammation through a transforming growth factor β1-dependent 
pathway. This genetic association, however, has not been consistently observed 
in other RA cohorts. We sought to clarify the contribution of FOXO3 to prognosis 
in RA by combining detailed analysis of nonradiographic disease severity 
measures with an in vivo model of arthritis.
METHODS: Collagen-induced arthritis, the most commonly used mouse model of RA, 
was used to assess how Foxo3 contributes to arthritis severity. Using clinical, 
serologic, and biochemical methods, the arthritis that developed in mice 
carrying a loss-of-function mutation in Foxo3 was compared with that which 
occurred in littermate controls. The association of rs12212067 with 
nonradiographic measures of RA severity, including the C-reactive protein level, 
the swollen joint count, the tender joint count, the Disease Activity Score in 
28 joints, and the Health Assessment Questionnaire score, were modeled 
longitudinally in a large prospective cohort of patients with early RA.
RESULTS: Loss of Foxo3 function resulted in more severe arthritis in vivo (both 
clinically and histologically) and was associated with higher titers of 
anticollagen antibodies and interleukin-6 in the blood. Similarly, rs12212067 (a 
single-nucleotide polymorphism that increases FOXO3 transcription) was 
associated with reduced inflammation, both biochemically and clinically, and 
with lower RA activity scores.
CONCLUSION: Consistent with its known role in restraining inflammatory 
responses, FOXO3 limits the severity of in vivo arthritis and, through genetic 
variation that increases its transcription, is associated with reduced 
inflammation and disease activity in RA patients, effects that result in less 
radiographic damage.

© 2016 The Authors. Arthritis & Rheumatology published by Wiley Periodicals, 
Inc. on behalf of the American College of Rheumatology.
