BACKGROUND: Probiotics have been considered as an approach to addressing the 
consequences of different inflammatory disorders. The spore-forming probiotic 
strain Bacillus coagulans has demonstrated anti-inflammatory and 
immune-modulating effects in both animals and humans. The prebiotic inulin also 
potentially affects the immune system as a result of the change in the 
composition or fermentation profile of the gastrointestinal microbiota.
OBJECTIVE: In the present study, an in vivo model was conducted to investigate 
the possible influences of probiotic B. coagulans and prebiotic inulin, both in 
combination and/or separately, on the downregulation of immune responses and the 
progression of rheumatoid arthritis (RA), using arthritis-induced rat model.
DESIGN: Forty-eight healthy male Wistar rats were randomly categorized into six 
experimental groups as follows: 1) control: normal healthy rats fed with 
standard diet, 2) disease control (RA): arthritis-induced rats fed with standard 
diet, 3) prebiotic (PRE): RA+ 5% w/w long-chain inulin, 4) probiotic (PRO): RA+ 
10(9) spores/day B. coagulans by orogastric gavage, 5) synbiotic (SYN): RA+ 5% 
w/w long-chain inulin and 10(9) spores/day B. coagulans, and 6) treatment 
control: (INDO): RA+ 3 mg/kg/day indomethacin by orogastric gavage. Feeding with 
the listed diets started on day 0 and continued to the end of study. On day 14, 
rats were injected with complete Freund's adjuvant (CFA) to induce arthritis. 
Arthritis activity was evaluated by the biochemical parameters and paw 
thickness. Biochemical assay for fibrinogen (Fn), serum amyloid A (SAA), and 
TNF-α and alpha-1-acid glycoprotein (α1AGp) was performed on day 21, 28, and 35 
(7, 14 and 21 days post RA induction), respectively.
RESULTS: Pretreatment with PRE, PRO, and SYN diets significantly inhibits SAA 
and Fn production in arthritic rats (P < 0.001). A significant decrease in the 
production of pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as TNF-α, was seen in the PRE, 
PRO, and SYN groups (P < 0.001), which was similar to the anti-inflammatory 
effect of indomethacin. Furthermore, no significant anti-inflammatory effects 
were observed following different treatments using α1 AGp as an RA indicator. 
Pretreatment with all supplied diets significantly inhibited the development of 
paw swelling induced by CFA (P < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: The results of this study indicate that the oral intake of probiotic 
B. coagulans and prebiotic inulin can improve the biochemical and clinical 
parameters of induced RA in rat.
