OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to determine if serum microRNA (miRNA) 
signatures were biomarkers of early cartilage degeneration in preclinical mouse 
models of post-traumatic osteoarthritis (OA) and inflammatory arthritis.
METHODS: Cartilage degeneration was induced in 10-12 week old male C57BL6 mice 
by destabilization of the medial meniscus (DMM) or intra-articular injection of 
methylated-bovine-serum-albumin (AIA), with sham-operated or saline-injected 
control animals (n = 6/treatment/time). Total serum RNA and knee joints were 
isolated at 1, 4 and 16 weeks post-induction. Cartilage degeneration was scored 
histologically. Serum miRNA expression profiling was performed using Agilent 
microarrays and validated by qPCR.
RESULTS: DMM-operated and AIA mice had characteristic cartilage degeneration 
(proteoglycan loss, chondrocyte hypertrophy, structural damage), that increased 
significantly with time compared with controls, and with distinct temporal 
differences between arthritis models. However, expression profiling revealed no 
statistically significant dysregulation of serum miRNAs between AIA vs 
saline-injected or DMM vs sham-operated control mice at the critical early 
disease stages. The inability to detect DMM or AIA serum miRNA signatures 
compared with controls was not due to the insensitivity of the expression 
profiling approach since significant changes were observed in miRNA expression 
between the arthritis models and between time points.
CONCLUSION: While distinct patterns of progressive cartilage degradation were 
induced in the arthritis models, we were unable to identify any serum miRNAs 
that were significantly dysregulated in early stages of disease compared with 
controls. This suggests circulating serum miRNAs may not be useful as cartilage 
biomarkers in distinguishing the early or progressive stages of arthritis 
cartilage degeneration.

Copyright © 2016 Osteoarthritis Research Society International. Published by 
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
