BACKGROUND: This work aimed to evaluate the effects of genistein treatment in 
Collagen Induced Arthritis (CIA) mouse model.
METHODS: CIA was elicited in DBA/1 Mice by an intradermal injection of 100 μL of 
an emulsion of bovine type II collagen (CII) in isovolumic incomplete Freund's 
adjuvant (IFA) at the base of the tail. Twenty-one days later, a second 
injection of CII in IFA was administered at the base of the tail. After the 
symptoms of arthritis showed in mouse model, we divided animals into two groups 
according to their clinical symptom scores. The treatment group was 
intraperitoneally injected daily with genistein (based on the pre-experiment 
data and literature reported, 5 mg/kg dose was selected and tested) for 12 days, 
while the control group was injected with phosphate buffered saline. 
Inflammatory cytokines titer, radiological, and histological observations were 
completed at different time's points after treatment. CT analysis was conducted 
3 months after the treatment to observe the articular structures. 
Immunohistochemical analysis was performed to investigate the expression and 
distribution of VEGF in joint tissues.
RESULTS: Genistein suppressed the expressions of IL-1β, IL-6 and TNF-α in the 
serum. Radiological results showed that bone degradation was inhibited by the 
treatment. Moreover, hematoxylin and eosin staining showed that the degree of 
inflammation was relieved. In the cartilage area, TRAP stain-positive cells were 
detected, which was notably reduced in the treatment group compared to the 
control group. Micro-CT 3D images clearly exhibited that the joint adhered and 
structures destroyed in the control group with less destruction in the treatment 
group. Furthermore, genistein suppressed VEGF expression, and blocked 
angiogenesis in the synovial tissue.
CONCLUSION: Our work provides further data regarding the effects of genistein as 
a potential treatment drug for RA, as well as the role of genistein in the 
anti-inflammatory pathway in RA therapy.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.org.
