To determine the effect of glucocorticoids (GCs) on endothelial dysfunction (ED) 
and on traditional cardiovascular (CV) risk factors in the adjuvant-induced 
arthritis (AIA) rat model. At the first signs of AIA, a high dose (HD) [10 
mg/kg/day, intraperitoneally (i.p.), GC-HD] or low dose (LD) (1 mg/kg/day, i.p., 
GC-LD) of prednisolone was administered for 3 weeks. Endothelial function was 
studied in aortic rings relaxed with acetylcholine (Ach) with or without 
inhibitors of nitric oxide synthase (NOS), cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2), arginase, 
endothelium derived hyperpolarizing factor (EDHF) and superoxide anions ( O2-°) 
production. Aortic expression of endothelial NOS (eNOS), Ser1177-phospho-eNOS, 
COX-2, arginase-2, p22phox and p47phox was evaluated by Western blotting 
analysis. Arthritis scores, blood pressure, heart rate and blood levels of 
cytokines, triglycerides, cholesterol and glucose were measured. GC-HD but not 
GC-LD reduced arthritis score significantly and improved Ach-induced relaxation 
(P < 0·05). The positive effect of GC-HD resulted from increased NOS activity 
and EDHF production and decreased COX-2/arginase activities and O2-° production. 
These functional effects relied upon increased phospho-eNOS expression and 
decreased COX-2, arginase-2 and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate 
(NADPH) oxidase expression. Despite the lack of effect of GC-LD on ED, it 
increased NOS and EDHF and down-regulated O2-° pathways but did not change 
arginase and COX-2 pathways. GC-HD increased triglycerides levels and blood 
pressure significantly (P < 0·05). Both doses of GCs decreased to the same 
extent as plasma interleukin (IL)-1β and tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-α levels 
(P < 0·05). Our data demonstrated that subchronic treatment with prednisolone 
improved endothelial function in AIA via pleiotropic effects on endothelial 
pathways. These effects occurred independently of the deleterious 
cardiometabolic effects and the impact of prednisolone on systemic inflammation.
