BACKGROUND: Rheumatoid arthritis synovial fibroblasts (RASFs) are known to 
travel via the bloodstream from sites of cartilage destruction to new locations 
where they reinitiate the destructive processes at distant articular cartilage 
surfaces. In this study, we examined the role of interleukin (IL)-1-induced 
cartilage changes and their chemotactic effect on RASF transmigratory capacity.
METHODS: To investigate synovial fibroblast (SF) transmigration through 
endothelial layers, we used a modified Boyden chamber with an endothelioma cell 
layer (bEnd.5) as a barrier and IL-1-treated murine cartilage explants as a 
chemotactic stimulus for SFs from human tumor necrosis factor-transgenic 
(hTNFtg) mice. We injected recombinant IL-1 or collagenase into knee joints of 
wild-type mice, followed by tail vein injection of fluorescence-labeled hTNFtg 
SFs. The distribution and intensity of transmigrating hTNFtg SFs were measured 
by fluorescence reflectance imaging with X-ray coregistration. Toluidine blue 
staining was performed to evaluate the amount of cartilage destruction.
RESULTS: Histomorphometric analyses and in vivo imaging revealed a high degree 
of cartilage proteoglycan loss after intra-articular IL-1 and collagenase 
injection, accompanied by an enhanced in vivo extravasation of hTNFtg SFs into 
the respective knee joints, suggesting that structural cartilage damage 
contributes significantly to the attraction of hTNFtg SFs into these joints. In 
vitro results showed that degraded cartilage was directly responsible for the 
enhanced transmigratory capacity because stimulation with IL-1-treated 
cartilage, but not with IL-1 or cartilage alone, was required to increase hTNFtg 
SF migration.
CONCLUSIONS: The present data indicate that structural cartilage damage 
facilitates the migration of arthritic SF into affected joints. The prevention 
of early inflammatory cartilage damage may therefore help prevent the 
progression of rheumatoid arthritis and its spread to previously unaffected 
joints.
