Antigen-specific immune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis are often 
accompanied by pain and hyperalgesia. Our previous studies have demonstrated 
that Fc-gamma-receptor type I (FcγRI) is expressed in a subpopulation of rat 
dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons and can be directly activated by IgG immune 
complex (IgG-IC). In this study we investigated whether neuronal FcγRI 
contributes to antigen-specific pain in the naïve and rheumatoid arthritis model 
rats. In vitro calcium imaging and whole-cell patch clamp recordings in 
dissociated DRG neurons revealed that only the small-, but not medium- or 
large-sized DRG neurons responded to IgG-IC. Accordingly, in vivo 
electrophysiological recordings showed that intradermal injection of IgG-IC into 
the peripheral receptive field could sensitize only the C- (but not A-) type 
sensory neurons and evoke action potential discharges. Pain-related behavioral 
tests showed that intradermal injection of IgG-IC dose-dependently produced 
mechanical and thermal hyperalgesia in the hindpaw of rats. These behavioral 
effects could be alleviated by localized administration of non-specific IgG or 
an FcγRI antibody, but not by mast cell stabilizer or histamine antagonist. In a 
rat model of antigen-induced arthritis (AIA) produced by methylated bovine serum 
albumin, FcγRI were found upregulated exclusively in the small-sized DRG 
neurons. In vitro calcium imaging revealed that significantly more small-sized 
DRG neurons responded to IgG-IC in the AIA rats, although there was no 
significant difference between the AIA and control rats in the magnitude of 
calcium changes in the DRG neurons. Moreover, in vivo electrophysiological 
recordings showed that C-nociceptive neurons in the AIA rats exhibited a greater 
incidence of action potential discharges and stronger responses to mechanical 
stimuli after IgG-IC was injected to the receptive fields. These results suggest 
that FcγRI expressed in the peripheral nociceptors might be directly activated 
by IgG-IC and contribute to antigen-specific pain in pathological conditions.
