Tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNFα) is a cytokine that is pivotal in the 
inflammatory response. Blockade of TNFα has been shown to be effective in a 
number of human autoimmune diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis, raising the 
question of whether this approach may be effective in inflammatory kidney 
disease, such as ANCA-associated vasculitis (AAV). In AAV, there is considerable 
evidence for the role of TNFα in the pathophysiology of disease, including 
increased expression of TNFα mRNA in leucocytes and in renal tissue. 
Importantly, TNFα can induce leucocyte cell membrane expression of the 
autoantigens involved in vasculitis [proteinase 3 and myeloperoxidase (MPO)], 
thus priming cells for the effects of ANCA. In rodent models of anti-GBM disease 
(nephrotoxic nephritis), TNFα enhances glomerular injury and TNFα blockade using 
soluble TNFα receptor or anti-TNFα antibody ameliorates disease. Mice deficient 
in TNFα are protected from nephrotoxic nephritis and this effect is dependent 
mainly on intrinsic renal cells. A mouse model of anti-MPO antibody-induced 
glomerulonephritis is enhanced by LPS, and this effect is blocked by anti-TNFα 
antibody. In a rat model of AAV induced by MPO (experimental autoimmune 
vasculitis), anti-TNFα antibody improves renal pathology and also reduces 
leucocyte transmigration, as shown by intravital microscopy. In clinical 
studies, the Wegener's Granulomatosis Etanercept Trial (WGET) showed no benefit 
of additional etanercept versus standard therapy. However, there are several 
reasons why the results of the WGET study do not rule out the use of anti-TNFα 
antibody in acute renal AAV, including the study design and the considerable 
biological differences between the effects of etanercept and anti-TNFα antibody. 
There are several clinical studies demonstrating a response to anti-TNFα 
antibody in patients with AAV refractory to conventional treatment, and in some 
of these, the addition of anti-TNFα antibody was the only change in treatment. 
We suggest that further investigation of TNFα blockade in AAV is warranted.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of ERA-EDTA. 
All rights reserved.
