BACKGROUND: Inflammation is a normal and necessary prerequisite to healing of 
the injured tissues. Inflammation contributes to all disease process including 
immunity, vascular pathology, trauma, sepsis, chemical, and metabolic injuries. 
The secretory phospholipase A2 (sPLA2) is a key enzyme in the production of 
pro-inflammatory mediators in chronic inflammatory disorders such as rheumatoid 
arthritis, coronary heart disease, diabetes, and asthma. The sPLA2 also 
contribute to neuroinflammatory disorders such as Parkinson's, Alzheimer's, and 
Crohn's disease.
AIMS: The present study aims to investigate the inhibition of human sPLA2 by a 
popular medicinal herb Boerhaavia diffusa Linn. as a function of 
anti-inflammatory activity.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The aqueous and different organic solvents extracts of B. 
diffusa were prepared and evaluated for human synovial fluid, human pleural 
fluid, as well as Vipera russelli and Naja naja venom sPLA2 enzyme inhibition.
RESULTS: Among the extracts, the ethanol extract of B. diffusa (EEBD) showed the 
highest sPLA2 inhibition and IC50 values ranging from 17.8 to 27.5 μg. Further, 
antioxidant and lipid peroxidation activities of B. diffusa extract were checked 
using 2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl radical, thiobarbituric acid, and rat liver 
homogenate. The antioxidant activity of EEBD was more or less directly 
proportional to in vitro sPLA2 inhibition. Eventually, the extract was subjected 
to neutralize sPLA2-induced mouse paw edema and indirect hemolytic activity. The 
EEBD showed similar potency in both the cases.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings suggest that the bioactive molecule/s from the EEBD 
is/are potentially responsible for the observed in vitro and in vivo sPLA2 
inhibition and antioxidant activity.
SUMMARY: The present study aims to investigate the inhibition of human sPLA2 by 
a popular medicinal herb Boerhaavia diffusa Linn. as a function of anti 
inflammatory activity. Abbreviation Used: EEBD: Ethanolic extract of boerhaavia 
diffusa, sPLA2: Secretory phospholipase A2, HSF: Human synovial fluid, HPF: 
Human pleural fluid, VRV-PLA2-V: Vipera russelli phospholipase A2, NN-PLA2-I: 
Naja naja phospholipase A2.
