BACKGROUND: Evidence suggests lymphatic function mediates local rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA) flares. Yet biologics that target the immune system are dosed 
systemically via the subcutaneous (SC) administration route, thereby 
inefficiently reaching local lymphatic compartments. Nanotopography has 
previously been shown to disrupt tight cellular junctions, potentially enhancing 
local lymphatic delivery and potentially improving overall therapeutic efficacy.
METHOD: We first characterized nanotopography (SOFUSA™) delivery of an anti-TNF 
drug, etanercept, by comparing pharmacokinetic profiles to those obtained by 
conventional SC, intravenous (IV), and intradermal (ID) routes of 
administration, and assessed uptake of radiolabeled etanercept in draining lymph 
nodes (LNs) in single dosing studies. We then compared etanercept efficacy in a 
progressive rat model of collagen-induced arthritis (CIA), administered 
systemically via SC route of administration; via the regional lymphatics through 
ID delivery; or through a nanotopography (SOFUSA™) device at 10, 12, and 14 days 
post CIA induction. Measurements of hind limb swelling and near-infrared 
fluorescence (NIRF) imaging of afferent lymph pumping function and reflux were 
conducted on days 11, 13, and 18 post CIA induction and compared to untreated 
CIA animals. Univariate and multivariate analysis of variance were used to 
compare the group differences for percentage swelling and lymphatic contractile 
activity.
RESULTS: Even though all three modes of administration delivered an equal amount 
of etanercept, SOFUSA™ delivery resulted in increased lymphatic pumping and 
significantly reduced swelling as compared to untreated, ID, and SC groups. 
Pharmacokinetic profiles in serum and LN uptake studies showed that using the 
nanotopography device resulted in the greatest uptake and retention in draining 
LNs.
CONCLUSIONS: Locoregional lymphatic delivery of biologics that target the immune 
system may have more favorable pharmacodynamics than SC or IV administration. 
Nanotopography may provide a more efficient method for delivery of anti-TNF 
drugs to reverse impairment of lymphatic function and reduce swelling associated 
with RA flares.
