Background and Purpose:Polygonum orientale L. (family: Polygonaceae), named 
Hongcao in China, is a Traditional Chinese Medicinal and has long been used for 
rheumatic arthralgia and rheumatoid arthritis. However, no pharmacological and 
mechanism study to confirm these clinic effects have been published. In this 
investigation, the anti-inflammatory, analgesic effects and representative 
active ingredient compounds of P. orientale have been studied. Methods: Dried 
small pieces of the stems and leaves of P. orientale were decocted with water 
and partitioned successively to obtain ethyl acetate and ethyl ether extract of 
P. orientale (POEa and POEe). Chemical compositions of them were analyzed by 
UPLC-Q-Exactive HRMS. Anti-inflammatory and analgesic effects of POEa and POEe 
were evaluated using xylene induced ear edema, carrageenan induced paw edema, 
Freunds' complete adjuvant induced arthritis, and formaldehyde induced pain in 
rat. Their mechanisms of anti-inflammatory and analgesic effects were also 
studied via assays of TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6, and PGE2 in serum. Results: 
UPLC-Q-Exactive HRMS analysis showed that POEa and POEe mainly contained 
flavonoids including orientin, isoorientin, vitexin, luteolin, and quercetin. 
Furthermore, anti-inflammatory effects of POEa and POEe were evident in xylene 
induced ear edema. The paw edema in Freund's complete adjuvant and carrageenan 
were significantly (P < 0.05, 0.01) inhibited by POEa (5, 7.5 g/kg). POEe (7.5 
g/kg) was significantly (P < 0.05, 0.01) inhibited Freunds' complete adjuvant 
induced paw edema and cotton pellet induced granuloma formation. Similarly, POEe 
significantly (P < 0.05, 0.01) inhibited the pain sensation in acetic acid 
induced writhing test. POEa (5, 7.5 g/kg) significantly (P < 0.05, 0.01) 
inhibited formaldehyde induced pain in both phases. POEa (7.5 g/kg) markedly (P 
< 0.05) prolonged the latency period of hot plate test after 30 and 60 min. The 
concentrations of TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6, and PGE2 were significantly (P < 0.01) 
decreased by POEa (3.75, 5 g/kg). Conclusion: POEa and POEe have 
anti-inflammatory and analgesic effects, which was mainly relevant to the 
presence of flavonoids, including orientin, isoorientin, vitexin, luteolin, and 
quercetin. The mechanism of anti-inflammatory and analgesic effects of POEa may 
be to decrease the concentrations of TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6, and PGE2 in serum.
