Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a chronic relapsing disorder of the 
intestine, with increasing incidence worldwide. At present, the management of 
IBD is an unmet medical need due to the ineffectiveness of currently available 
drugs in treating all patients, and there is strong demand for novel 
therapeutics. In this regard, vasoactive intestinal peptide, a potent 
anti-inflammatory endogenous hormone, has shown promise in managing multiple 
immune disorders in animal models. However, when administered in the free form, 
VIP undergoes rapid degradation in vivo, and with continuous infusion, it causes 
severe dose limiting side effects. To overcome these barriers, we have developed 
a superior mode to deliver VIP in its native form, using sterically stabilized 
micelles (VIP-SSM). Our previous studies demonstrated that, VIP, when 
administered in SSM, prevented joint damage and inflammation in a mouse model of 
rheumatoid arthritis at a significantly lower dose than the free peptide, 
completely abrogating the serious side effect of hypotension associated with 
VIP. In the current study, we demonstrate the therapeutic benefit of VIP-SSM 
over free peptide in reversing severe colitis associated with IBD. First, we 
conducted preliminary studies with dextran sulfate sodium (DSS) induced colitis 
in mice, to determine the effectiveness of VIP administered on alternate days in 
reducing disease severity. Thereafter, a single intra peritoneal injection of 
VIP-SSM or the free peptide was used to determine its therapeutic effect on the 
reversal of colitis and associated diarrhea. The results demonstrated that when 
administered on alternate days, both VIP-SSM and VIP were capable of alleviating 
DSS colitis in mice. However, when administered as a single dose, in a 
therapeutic setting, VIP-SSM showed superior benefits compared to the free 
peptide in ameliorating colitis phenotype. Namely, the loss of solid fecal 
pellets and increased fluid accumulation in colon resulting from DSS insult was 
abrogated in VIP-SSM treated mice and not with free VIP. Furthermore, reduced 
protein and mRNA levels of the major chloride bicarbonate exchanger, down 
regulated in adenoma (DRA), seen with DSS was reversed with VIP-SSM, but not 
with the free peptide. Similarly, VIP-SSM treatment significantly reduced the 
elevated mRNA levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines and showed significant 
histologic recovery when compared to mice treated with free VIP. Therefore, 
these results demonstrated that as a single dose, the anti-inflammatory and 
antidiarrheal effects of VIP can be achieved effectively when administered as a 
nanomedicine. Therefore, we propose VIP-SSM to be developed as a potential 
therapeutic tool for treating ulcerative colitis, a type of IBD.
