Coronary artery disease (CAD) is a leading cause of morbidity and mortality 
worldwide. Atherosclerosis, a leading cause of CAD, is initiated by the 
transmigration of innate immune monocytes to inflammatory sites of deposited 
lipid called fatty streaks, which are present in arterial walls of medium to 
large arteries. The key pathogenic feature of lesions at this early stage of 
atherosclerosis is the maturation of monocytes which migrate into arteries to 
form foam cells or lipid-laden macrophages. Considerable evidence supports the 
hypothesis that risk of atherosclerosis is increased by chronic inflammatory 
conditions accompanying diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis and HIV, as well 
as general ageing, and that this risk is predicted by monocyte activation. While 
mouse models provide a good platform to investigate the role of monocytes in 
atherogenesis in vivo, they require genetic alteration of natural cholesterol 
metabolism and drastic alteration of normal mouse diets, and have limited 
suitability for the study of atherogenic influences of human comorbid diseases. 
This motivated us to develop a human in vitro model to measure the atherogenic 
potential of monocytes isolated from individuals with defined disease states. 
Currently, human in vitro models are limiting in that they evaluate monocyte 
transmigration and foam cell formation in isolation. Here we describe a protocol 
in which monocytes isolated from patient blood transmigrate across human 
endothelial cells into a type 1 collagen matrix, and their propensity to mature 
into foam cells in the presence or absence of exogenous lipid is measured. The 
protocol has been validated for the use of human monocytes purified from 
individuals with HIV infection and elderly HIV uninfected individuals. This 
model is versatile and allows monocyte transmigration and foam cell formation to 
be evaluated using either microscopy or flow cytometry as well as allowing the 
assessment of atherogenic factors present in serum or plasma.
