Recent evidence suggests that renal tubular injury plays a key role in 
deterioration of renal function in both chronic kidney disease (CKD) and acute 
kidney injury (AKI). Since commonly used biochemical indicators such as GFR, 
serum creatinine, blood urea nitrogen and creatinine clearance are inappropriate 
for detecting alteration in renal tubules, biomarkers reflecting renal tubular 
injury have been extensively explored. Our research group identified leucine 
rich α-2 glycoprotein (LRG) as a novel serum biomarker for various inflammatory 
diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis and inflammatory bowel disease. In 
inflammatory diseases, LRG expression is up-regulated at the site of 
inflammation, in accordance with the induction of LRG in many cell types by 
various inflammatory cytokines. Recently, urinary LRG was reported as a possible 
biomarker for several renal diseases, but the mechanism of LRG excretion in 
urine is still unclear. In this study, by analyzing a mouse albumin (ALB) 
overload model that is commonly used to study proteinuria-induced renal tubular 
injury, we provided evidence that urinary LRG is produced in renal tubular 
epithelial cells by interleukin-1β (IL-1β) that is released during 
proteinuria-induced renal damage. In this model, urinary LRG became detectable 
after ALB overload. In kidney, mRNA expression of LRG together with that of 
NACHT LRR and PYD domains-containing protein 3 (NLRP3) and IL-1β was 
significantly up-regulated in ALB-overloaded mice, compared to PBS-treated mice. 
By pathological analysis of kidney, LRG was detected in the injured proximal 
tubules, distal tubules and collecting ducts in ALB-overloaded mice. 
Accordingly, in vitro stimulation of mouse renal cortical tubular epithelial 
cells with excessive ALB led to LRG mRNA up-regulation and its protein 
secretion, which was effectively blocked by IL-1 receptor antagonist. These 
results suggest that urinary LRG could be applied to a biomarker detecting renal 
tubular injury in various renal diseases.
