Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an autoimmune inflammatory disease, affecting 
almost 1% of world population. Although the exact cause of RA is not known but 
the complex interaction between inflammatory mediators like tumour necrosis 
factor-α (TNF-α), interleukin-1β (IL-1β), cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and nitric 
oxide (NO) is accountable for cartilage destruction in joints. Gold is used for 
arthritis treatment since long without knowing its mechanism of action. Hence, 
the present study was designed to assess antiarthritic activity of nanogold 
(AuNGs) in collagen-induced arthritic (CIA) rat model by virtue of decreasing 
inflammatory mediators and oxidative stress. After induction CIA rats were 
treated with AuNGs in phosphate buffer at a dose of 20 μg/kg body weight for 
20 days and found a significant decrease in the level of inflammatory mediators 
like TNF-α, IL-1β, COX-2 and transcription factor NF-kB (Nuclear factor-kB), 
which was found to be elevated in CIA rats. Additionally imbalance in oxidant 
and antioxidant status were determined and perceived that AuNGs remarkably 
attenuates the imbalance in level of antioxidant and oxidant near to normal. In 
consistent to biochemical results, mRNA expression of NF-kB, TNF-α, COX-2, and 
iNOS were also up-regulated in CIA rats, which were considerably down regulated 
by AuNGs treatment. These findings were positively correlated with the 
histological results of joints, displayed reduced inflammation and bone erosion 
in treated group. This study demonstrates the ability of AuNGs to ameliorate 
production of inflammatory mediators and oxidative stress in CIA rats. Induction 
of arthritis in rats showed increased inflammation, which activate the 
transcription factor NF-kB through activation of of IkB kinases (IKK) and 
ubiquination/proteosome degradation of IKB and transportation of activated NF-kB 
from cytoplasm to nucleus. In nucleus activated NF-kB bind to the promoter 
region of target gene and up regulate the production of pro-inflammatory 
cytokines, COX-2 and other inflammatory mediators that leads to cartilage 
destruction. AuNGs inhibit the activation of NF-kB and other inflammatory 
mediators and attenuate inflammation and cartilage destruction. COX-2: 
cyclooxygenase-2; IKK: IkB kinases; IKB: I Kappa B; IL-1β: interleukin-6; IL-6: 
interleukin-6; iNOS: inducible nitric oxide synthase; NF-kB: nuclear 
transcription factor kappa B; ROS: reactive oxygen species; TNF-α: tumour 
necrosis factor-alpha.
