Osteoarthritis is a type of joint disease that may lead to other joint diseases. 
Previous research has demonstrated that tumor necrosis factor (TNF)‑α is 
associated with osteoarthritis activity and pathology. The possible mechanisms 
of the TNF‑α‑mediated signaling pathway have not been clearly elaborated in 
synovial fibroblasts. The present study aimed to investigate the potential 
mechanisms of TNF‑α in a mouse model of iodoacetate‑induced osteoarthritis. 
Reverse transcription‑quantitative polymerase chain reaction, ELISA, western 
blotting and immunohistochemistry were performed to evaluate the role of TNF‑α 
in the progression of osteoarthritis. The results revealed that the serum levels 
of TNF‑α, interleukin (IL)‑1β, IL‑4 and IL‑6 were significantly upregulated in a 
mouse model of iodoacetate‑induced osteoarthritis compared with healthy mice 
(P<0.01). TNF‑α, IL‑1β, IL‑4 and IL‑6 mRNA and protein levels were also 
significantly upregulated in synovial fibroblasts in the experimental mice 
(P<0.01). It was demonstrated that TNF‑α increased pro‑inflammation factors 
matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)‑3, MMP‑9, nuclear factor (NF)‑κB and receptor 
activator of NF‑κB ligand (RANKL) in synovial fibroblasts. It was also observed 
that the toll‑like receptor (TLR)‑3 was significantly upregulated and 
extracellular signal‑regulated kinase (ERK) and protein kinase B (AKT) were 
significantly downregulated in synovial fibroblasts in osteoarthritis mice 
(P<0.01). An in vitro assay demonstrated that TNF‑α inhibitor decreased mRNA and 
protein levels of IL‑1β, IL‑4 and IL‑6 in synovial fibroblasts. The knockdown of 
TLR‑3 abolished the TNF‑α upregulated mRNA and protein levels of IL‑1β, IL‑4 and 
IL‑6 in synovial fibroblasts. In addition, the knockdown of TLR‑3 also reversed 
TNF‑α‑upregulated ERK and AKT expression in synovial fibroblasts. In vivo assays 
demonstrated that TNF‑α inhibitor significantly decreased the deposition of 
IL‑1β, IL‑4 and IL‑6 as well as bone destruction and significantly increased the 
body weight and osteoarthritis score for osteoarthritic mice (P<0.01). TNF‑α 
inhibitor decreased TLR‑3 and significantly increased the expression and 
phosphorylation of ERK and AKT in articular cartilage (P<0.01). In conclusion 
the results of the present study indicate that TNF‑α serves an essential role in 
synovial fibroblasts in osteoarthritis, suggesting that inhibition of TNF‑α may 
decrease inflammation via the TLR‑3‑mediated ERK/AKT signaling pathway in a 
mouse model of monosodium iodoacetate‑induced osteoarthritis.
