Methotrexate (MTX) is frequently used in the treatment of several diseases 
including cancers, rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, systemic lupus 
erythematosus, and dermatomyositis. Previously, chemotherapeutic agents have 
been reported to cause permanent azoospermia and infertility in men. 
Methotrexate has been also shown to damage the seminiferous tubules of the 
testicles, lower the sperm count, and cause genetic mutations (in DNA) in sperm. 
In this study, we aimed to investigate the protective effects of alpha lipoic 
acid (ALA) on MTX-induced testicle damage in a rat model. A total of 40 male 
Wistar Albino rats were used in this study. The rats were divided into four 
groups including 10 rats in each. The first group (control group) received only 
saline intraperitoneal (i.p.); the second group (ALA group) was given ALA 
100 mg/kg i.p.; the third group (MTX group) received single dose MTX 20 mg/kg 
i.p.; and the fourth group (MTX + ALA group) received single dose MTX 20 mg/kg 
i.p. and ALA 100 mg/kg i.p. Malondialdehyde (MDA), superoxide dismutase (SOD), 
catalase (CAT), glutathione peroxidase (GPx), myeloperoxidase (MPO) levels in 
the testicular tissue and serum testosterone, serum total antioxidant status 
(TAS) and total oxidant status (TOS) levels were biochemically evaluated. 
Testicular tissues histopathologically evaluated. In the MTX group, the MDA, TAS 
and TOS levels were higher, while the SOD, CAT, GPx, MPO and serum testosterone 
levels decreased. Compared to the MTX group, the MDA, TAS and TOS levels were 
lower and the SOD, CAT, GPx, MPO and serum testosterone levels increased in the 
MTX + ALA group. In the histopathological examination, the mean seminiferous 
tubule length (MSTD), germinal epithelial cell thickness (GECT), and mean 
testicular biopsy score (MTBS) were found to significantly decrease in the MTX 
group, compared to the control group. These values were significantly higher in 
the MTX + ALA group, compared to the MTX group (p < 0.05). In our experimental 
study, MTX caused severe tissue destruction in testicles by increasing the 
formation of free oxygen radicals. Based on our study results, we suggest that, 
as a potent free radical scavenger, ALA can reduce MTX-induced testicular tissue 
damage thanks to its antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties.
