OBJECTIVES: Cathepsin K is expressed by osteoclasts and synovial fibroblasts and 
degrades key components of bone and cartilage. Inhibition of cathepsin K 
protease activity may be beneficial for the prevention of bone erosion and 
cartilage degradation in rheumatoid arthritis (RA). The collagen-induced 
arthritis (CIA) rat model is well established for studying the pathology and 
treatment of RA. We investigated the effect of ONO-KK1-300-01, a cathepsin K 
inhibitor (CKI), on arthritis and bone mineral density (BMD) in rats with CIA.
METHODS: Seven-month-old female Sprague Dawley rats were divided into 5 groups: 
rats without CIA (CNT); CIA rats that underwent ovariectomy (OVX) and were 
treated with CKI; CIA rats that underwent OVX and were treated with vehicle 
(Veh); CIA rats that underwent sham surgery and were treated with CKI; and CIA 
rats that underwent sham surgery and were treated with Veh. CKI was orally 
administered at a dose of 15 mg/kg, thus initiating collagen sensitization, 
until death at 4 weeks. We evaluated hind paw thickness and the arthritis score 
every week until death. Radiographs of the resected left foot were obtained with 
a soft X-ray apparatus. Destruction of bone and cartilage was classified and 
scored as previously described by Engelhardt et al. BMD was measured by bone 
densitometry at the halfway point between the distal metaphysis and the 
diaphysis of the resected right femur. We also performed histomorphometry of the 
proximal left tibia, histological evaluation of arthritis, and a bone strength 
test.
RESULTS: CKI administration significantly reduced hind paw thickness and the 
arthritis score, and prevented a decrease in BMD. The radiographic score was 
significantly lower in the CKI group than in the Veh group. In the 
histomorphometric analysis, bone-resorption parameters were significantly lower 
in the CKI groups than in the Veh groups. CKI significantly inhibited synovial 
proliferation in the CIA rats. In the bone strength test, the ultimate stress 
was significantly higher in the CKI groups than in the Veh groups.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate that cathepsin K inhibitors may inhibit 
systemic and local bone loss, ameliorate arthritis, and attenuate the decrease 
of bone strength in an animal model of arthritis.
