ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Seeds of Caesalpinia minax Hance called 
'Ku-Shi-Lian' (KSL) in China have been used as Zhuang or Dai folk medicines for 
treatment of common cold, fever, rheumatoid arthritis and dysentery for hundred 
years.
AIM OF THE STUDY: This study aimed to investigate therapeutic efficacy of KSL 
extract using complete Freund's adjuvant (CFA) induced arthritis in a rat model 
and the anti-inflammatory activity of cassane diterpenes as the main active 
material basis of this herb.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Arthritis was induced in male Wistar rats (200-220 g) by 
immunization with CFA. Dexamethasone (DXMS) and Tripterygium glycosides (TG) 
were chosen as the positive drugs. Water soluble fraction (CMW, 1000 and 
2000 mg/kg) and chloroform soluble fraction (CMC, 400 and 800 mg/kg) of KSL were 
orally administered from day 1 and continued for 21 days. Change of paw swelling 
perimeter, arthritics score, body weight growth, were observed, and the 
production of TNF-α, IL-1β and IL-6 in serum were measured by enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay (ELISA). The histological changes in the ankle joint were 
analyzed in adjuvant induced arthritis rats. Moreover, the inhibitory effect on 
mRNA expression of proinflammatory cytokine IL-1β, IL-6 and TNF-α of fourteen 
cassane diterpenes obtained from CMC extract were valued using the RAW 264.7 
macrophages cell stimulated by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) assay.
RESULTS: The chloroform soluble fraction (CMC) showed the significantly 
suppressed change of paw swelling perimeter, arthritics score and increased body 
weight loss. The overproduction of TNF-α, IL-1β and IL-6 were remarkably 
suppressed in the serum. Fourteen cassane derivatives as the main constituents 
of CMC extract showed the promising activity on the expression mRNA of cytokine 
IL-1β, IL-6 and TNF-α produced by macrophages cells.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, the chloroform soluble fraction of 'KSL' (seeds of 
C. minax) was found to exert an anti-RA activity significantly in vivo for the 
first time, which indicted this fraction might be used as a powerful therapeutic 
agent for arthritis treatments. Cassane diterpenes, as the main constituents in 
this fraction, showed the anti-inflammation activity through the regulation of 
cytokine expression, which might be developed as target-agents for this national 
herb further developing.
