BACKGROUND: Expression of E2F transcription factor 2 (E2F2), a transcription 
factor related to the cell cycle, is abnormally high in rheumatoid arthritis 
synovial fibroblasts (RASFs). Deregulated expression of E2F2 leads to abnormal 
production of proinflammatory cytokines, such as interleukin (IL)-1α, IL-1β, and 
tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α in RASFs. However, the underlying mechanism by 
which E2F2 regulates expression of IL-1α, IL-1β, and TNF-α has not been fully 
elucidated. This study aimed to elucidate this mechanism and confirm the 
pathological roles of E2F2 in rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
METHODS: E2f2 knockout (KO) and wild-type (WT) mice were injected with collagen 
to induce RA. Cytokine production was assessed by quantitative real-time 
polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
(ELISA). Western blot and qRT-PCR were performed to evaluate the effect of E2F2 
on signaling pathway activity. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-PCR and 
luciferase assays were used to detect the transcriptional activity of target 
genes of E2F2. Nuclear translocation of STAT1 and p65 were assayed by Western 
blot, co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP), and immunofluorescence experiments.
RESULTS: The occurrence and severity of collagen-induced arthritis were 
decreased in E2f2-KO mice compared with WT mice. The expression of IL-1α, IL-1β, 
and TNF-α was also suppressed in mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) from E2f2-KO 
mice and RASFs with E2F2 knocked down. Mechanistically, we found that E2F2 can 
upregulate the expression of STAT1 and MyD88 through direct binding to their 
promoters, facilitate the formation of STAT1/MyD88 complexes, and consequently 
activate AKT. However, silencing STAT1/MyD88 or inactivating AKT significantly 
attenuated the induction of IL-1α, IL-1β, and TNF-α caused by the introduction 
of E2F2.
CONCLUSIONS: This study confirms the pathological role of E2F2 in RA and found 
that the E2F2-STAT1/MyD88-Akt axis is closely related with the inflammatory 
phenotype in RASFs.
