Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic autoimmune inflammatory arthropathy 
associated with articular damage and attendant comorbidities. Even although RA 
treatment has advanced remarkably over the last decade, a significant proportion 
of patients still do not achieve sustained remission. The cause of RA is not yet 
known despite the many potential mechanisms proposed. It has been confirmed that 
RA is associated with dysregulated immune system and persistent inflammation. 
Therefore, management of inflammation is always the target of therapy. 
Sinomenine (SIN) is the prescription drug approved by the Chinese government for 
RA treatment. A previous study found that SIN was a robust anti-inflammation 
drug. In this study, we screened the different secretory cytokines using 
inflammation antibody arrays and qRT-PCR in both LPS-induced and SIN-treated 
RAW264.7 cells followed by evaluation of the ability of SIN to modulate cytokine 
secretion in a cell model, collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) mouse model, and RA 
patients. Several clinical indexes affecting the 28-joint disease activity score 
(DAS28) were determined before and after SIN treatment. Clinical indexes, 
inflammatory cytokine secretion, and DAS28 were compared among RA patients 
treated with either SIN or methotrexate (MTX). To explore the mechanism of SIN 
anti-inflammatory function, RA-associated monocyte/macrophage subsets were 
determined using flow cytometry in CIA mouse model and RA patients, both treated 
with SIN. The results demonstrated that SIN regulated IL-6, GM-CSF, IL-12 p40, 
IL-1α, TNF-α, IL-1β, KC (CXCL1), Eotaxin-2, IL-10, M-CSF, RANTES, and MCP-1 
secretion in vivo and in vitro and reduced RA activity and DAS28 in a clinical 
setting. Furthermore, SIN attenuated CD11b+F4/80+CD64+ resident macrophages in 
the synovial tissue, CD11b+Ly6C+CD43+ macrophages in the spleen and draining 
lymph nodes of CIA mice. The percentage of CD14+CD16+ peripheral blood 
mononuclear cells was reduced by SIN in RA patients. These data indicated that 
SIN regulates the secretion of multiple inflammatory cytokines and 
monocyte/macrophage subsets, thereby suppressing RA progression. Therefore, 
along with MTX, SIN could be an alternative cost-effective anti-inflammatory 
agent for treating RA.
