OBJECTIVE: Immune complexes (ICs) play a critical role in the pathology of 
autoimmune diseases. The aim of this study was to generate and characterise a 
first-in-class anti-FcγRIIA antibody (Ab) VIB9600 (previously known as MEDI9600) 
that blocks IgG immune complex-mediated cellular activation for clinical 
development.
METHODS: VIB9600 was humanised and optimised from the IV.3 Ab. Binding affinity 
and specificity were determined by Biacore and ELISA. Confocal microscopy, Flow 
Cytometry-based assays and binding competition assays were used to assess the 
mode of action of the antibody. In vitro cell-based assays were used to 
demonstrate suppression of IC-mediated inflammatory responses. In vivo target 
suppression and efficacy was demonstrated in FcγRIIA-transgenic mice. 
Single-dose pharmacokinetic (PK)/pharmacodynamic study multiple dose Good 
Laboratory Practice (GLP) toxicity studies were conducted in non-human primates.
RESULTS: We generated a humanised effector-deficient anti-FcγRIIA antibody 
(VIB9600) that potently blocks autoantibody and IC-mediated proinflammatory 
responses. VIB9600 suppresses FcγRIIA activation by blocking ligand engagement 
and by internalising FcγRIIA from the cell surface. VIB9600 inhibits IC-induced 
type I interferons from plasmacytoid dendritic cells (involved in SLE), 
antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA)-induced production of reactive oxygen 
species by neutrophils (involved in ANCA-associated vasculitis) and IC-induced 
tumour necrosis factor α and interleukin-6 production (involved in rheumatoid 
arthritis). In FcγRIIA transgenic mice, VIB9600 suppressed antiplatelet 
antibody-induced thrombocytopaenia, acute anti-GBM Ab-induced nephritis and 
anticollagen Ab-induced arthritis. VIB9600 also exhibited favourable PK and 
safety profiles in cynomolgus monkey studies.
CONCLUSIONS: VIB9600 is a specific humanised antibody antagonist of FcγRIIA with 
null effector function that warrants further clinical development for the 
treatment of IC-mediated diseases.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2019. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.
