Collagen type II-induced arthritis (CIA) in Dark Agouti rats, a model of 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA), reproduces sexual dimorphism in the incidence and 
severity of the human disease. Th17 cells are central in the 
induction/propagation of autoimmune inflammation in CIA and RA. To assess 
mechanisms underlying this dimorphism in CIA rats, in lymph nodes draining 
inflamed joints and adjacent tissues (dLNs) from CIA rats of both sexes 
Th17/CD25+Foxp3+CD4+ T-regulatory cell (Treg) ratio, Th17 cell redifferentiation 
in functionally distinct subsets and Treg transdifferentiation into 
IL-17-producing cells (exTregs) were examined. In female rats (developing more 
severe CIA than their male counterparts) the higher frequency of all Th17 cells 
(reflecting partly their greater proliferation), followed by the higher 
frequency of highly pathogenic IFN-γ/GM-CSF-co-producing cells, but lower 
frequency of less pathogenic/immunoregulatory IL-10-producing cells among them 
was found. Additionally, compared with male rats, in female rats the lower 
frequency of Tregs was observed. Moreover, Tregs from female rats exhibited 
diminished proliferative and suppressive capacity (judging by PD-1 expression) 
and enhanced conversion into IL-17-producing cells. Given that TGF-β 
concentration was comparable in collagen-type II-stimulated dLN cell cultures 
from female and male rats, the shift in Th17/Treg ratio followed by augmented 
Th17 cell redifferentiation into IFN-γ/GM-CSF-co-producing cells and Treg 
transdifferentiation into IL-17-producing cells in female rats was associated 
with increased concentration of IL-6 in female rat dLN cell cultures, and the 
higher frequency of IL-1β- and IL-23-producing cells among their dLN cells. The 
lower frequency of IL-10-producing B cells, presumably B regulatory cells 
(Bregs) could also contribute to the shift in Th17/Treg ratio in female rat 
compared with male rat dLNs. Consistently, the lower expression of IL-35 (the 
cytokine promoting Treg expansion directly and indirectly, by favoring Breg 
expansion and conversion into IL-10/IL-35-producing cells) in female rat dLN 
cells was detected. Thus, the study identified putative cellular and molecular 
substrates of the sexual dimorphism in the immunopathogenesis and clinical 
outcome of CIA and suggested mechanisms to be targeted in females to improve 
control of Th17 response, and consequently clinical outcome of CIA, and possibly 
RA.
