BACKGROUND Rheumatoid arthritis is an autoimmune disease that causes chronic 
joint inflammation and there is no cure. Baicalin, as an ingredient in the roots 
of Scutellaria baicalensis, is supposed to possess an anti-inflammatory effect. 
However, the protective effect of baicalin on collagen-induced arthritis 
requires further investigation. MATERIAL AND METHODS A model of rheumatoid 
arthritis was established in 20 mice (8- to 10-weeks old). The mice were 
randomly divided into 2 groups after modeling and then injected with saline or 
baicalin, respectively. The synovial fluids and tissues were collected, and the 
pressure pain threshold and clinical arthritis score were measured. The levels 
of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, interlukin-1β (IL-1β), IL-6, matrix 
metalloproteinases (MMP)-2, MMP-9, nitric oxide synthase (iNOS), 
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and their downstream inflammatory mediators Janus 
kinase 1 (JAK1)/signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3), 
extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1/2 (ERK1/2), p38, Jun N-terminal kinases 
(JNK) activation were detected using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), 
and western blotting analyses. The mononuclear cells apoptosis ratio was 
calculated by flowcytometry analyses. RESULTS Baicalin significantly reduced 
disease activities in a rheumatoid arthritis mouse model, which were reflected 
by pressure pain thresholds and clinical arthritis scores. Relevant 
proinflammatory cytokines such as TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6, gelatinases (MMP-2, MMP-9) 
and inducible enzymes (iNOS, COX-2) were generally suppressed. Moreover, 
baicalin treatment induced cells apoptosis in synovial fluid monocytes and 
markedly down regulated JAK1/STAT3 but not mitogen-activated protein kinases 
(MAPKs) expressions in synovium of arthritis. CONCLUSIONS These observations 
confirm the relief of rheumatoid arthritis by baicalin. Our results indicate the 
effect is related with the modulation of decreased proinflammatory cytokines and 
inflammatory markers. And the apoptosis promotion of monocytes in synovial fluid 
were also inhibited. Moreover, the molecular mechanism implies suppressed 
JAK1/STAT3 signaling with baicalin treatment.
