BACKGROUND: (-)-Epicatechin-3-O-β-d-allopyranoside (ECAP) is isolated from the 
popular Chinese herbal medicine Davallia formosana, which has been used to treat 
bone diseases including bone fracture, arthritis, and osteoporosis.
PURPOSE: To investigate the antiarthritic and the anti-inflammatory effect of 
ECAP on a mouse model of collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) and in vitro.
METHODS: Male DBA/1 J mice were immunized by administering an intradermal 
injection of 100 µg of type II collagen in Freund's complete adjuvant. The 
control groups (vehicle) and ECAP were administered orally at doses of 1 ml/kg 
(H2O), 50 and 100 mg/ml/kg once a day from Day 22 to Day 42 after primary 
immunization. Paw swelling, arthritis severity score, and histological changes 
were examined. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay was used to measure the levels 
of cytokines, including tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α), interleukin 
(IL)-10, IL-17, IL-4, and interferon-γ (IFN-γ), in splenocytes. Furthermore, the 
anti-inflammatory activities of ECAP were investigated in vitro by measuring 
nitric oxide (NO) levels in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-activated RAW264.7 
macrophages.
RESULTS: In the CIA model, the oral administration of ECAP ameliorated paw edema 
and reduced the arthritis severity score and disease incidence. 
Histopathological examination demonstrated that ECAP treatment effectively 
protected the bone and cartilage of knee joints from erosion, lesion formation, 
and deformation compared with the vehicle treatment. ECAP also reduced IL-1β and 
MMP-9 expression in inflamed joints. Compared with the vehicle-treated mice with 
CIA, the reduced severity of the disease in ECAP-treated mice was associated 
with decreased levels of TNF-α and IL-17 and increased levels of IL-10 and IL-4 
in the supernatants of splenocyte cultures. Flow cytometry analysis demonstrated 
that ECAP increased the population of CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells, thereby 
inhibiting the B cell population. Anticollagen IgG1 and IgG2a levels decreased 
in the serum of ECAP-treated mice. ECAP suppressed LPS-induced NO production in 
RAW264.7 macrophages.
CONCLUSION: The administration of ECAP effectively suppressed inflammation and 
inflammatory pain and adjuvant-induced arthritis, indicating its therapeutic 
potential in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis.
