BACKGROUND: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an inflammatory autoimmune disease 
which leads to bone and cartilage erosion. Oxidative stress and pro-inflammatory 
cytokines plays crucial role in the pathophysiology of RA. Cinnamaldehyde and 
eugenol have a long history of medical use in various inflammatory disorders.
PURPOSE: The drugs available for the treatment of RA are associated with various 
side effects. The present study was conducted to evaluate the anti-arthritic 
effects of cinnamaldehyde and eugenol in rat model of arthritis.
METHODS: Type II collagen was intradermally injected to rats for the induction 
of arthritis. Cinnamaldehyde (10 and 20 mg/kg/day) and eugenol (10 and 
20 mg/kg/day) were given orally for 15 days, starting from day 21 to 35. 
Dexamethasone treated rats served as positive control. Histological, 
radiological and scanning electron microscopic analysis were done to monitor the 
effect of compounds on collagen induced arthritis (CIA). Reactive oxygen species 
(ROS) formation, nitric oxide and antioxidant status were also determined. The 
markers of biomolecular oxidation (protein, lipid and DNA) and activities of 
enzymatic antioxidants (superoxide dismutase, glutathione peroxidase, catalase 
and glutathione reductase) were also evaluated in the joint homogenate and 
plasma of rats. For detecting inflammation, levels of TNF-α, IL-6 and IL-10 were 
monitored by ELISA.
RESULTS: Our results showed anti-oxidant and anti-inflammatory effects of 
cinnamaldehyde and eugenol in arthritic rats. Scanning electron microscopy, 
histopathological and radiological findings also confirmed the anti-arthritic 
effects of cinnamaldehyde and eugenol. Both the compounds were effective in 
bringing significant decrease in the levels of ROS, nitric oxide, markers of 
biomolecular oxidation and increase in enzymatic and non-enzymatic antioxidants. 
The levels of TNF-α, IL-6 and IL-10 were also ameliorated by cinnamaldehyde and 
eugenol treatment. Between the two phytochemicals used, eugenol was found to be 
more effective than cinnamaldehyde in reducing the severity of arthritis.
CONCLUSION: Cinnamaldehyde and eugenol were effective in ameliorating oxidative 
stress and inflammation in arthritic rats. These findings indicate that 
cinnamaldehdye and eugenol have a great potential to be used as an adjunct in 
the management of RA.
