Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) alpha is a bioactive cytokine that is an important 
component of the inflammatory and pain pathways. Inhibition of TNF can decrease 
the inflammatory response, and this approach has been used in therapy of 
autoimmune conditions, most effectively in inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), 
rheumatoid arthritis, juvenile idiopathic arthritis (also known as juvenile 
rheumatoid arthritis), psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis and ankylosing 
spondylitis. Five anti-TNF antagonists have been developed and introduced into 
clinical medicine: a mouse-human chimeric monoclonal antibody to TNF 
(infliximab), two human monoclonal antibodies to TNF (adalimumab and golimumab), 
a humanized Fab fragment of anti-TNF linked to polyethylene glycol 
(certolizumab), and a soluble recombinant form of the TNF cellular receptor 
(etanercept) which, on binding, blocks the activity of TNF. These TNF 
antagonists have potent activity in several autoimmune diseases marked by 
excessive production of this proinflammatory cytokine. All five of these agents 
are approved for use in rheumatoid arthritis and are considered “disease 
modifying anti-rheumatic drugs” (DMARDs), having been shown to decrease pain, 
improve function, and ameliorate progressive joint damage in rheumatoid 
arthritis. The monoclonal antibodies to TNF have also been shown to be effective 
in psoriatic arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis and inflammatory bowel disease. 
The five agents rarely cause serum aminotransferase elevations, but have been 
linked to rare instances of clinically apparent, acute liver injury which often 
resembles autoimmune hepatitis and can be severe or require corticosteroid 
therapy. TNF antagonists are also immunosuppressive and can lead to reactivation 
of latent infections such as tuberculosis and hepatitis B. Severe and even fatal 
instances of reactivation of hepatitis B have been linked to several anti-TNF 
agents, and routine screening for HBsAg before starting therapy with these 
agents is recommended. Patients with HBsAg should receive prophylaxis with an 
oral antiviral agent during therapy with one of the TNF antagonists. Among the 
TNF antagonists, infliximab has been most frequently and etanercept least 
frequently linked to liver injury, including asymptomatic serum aminotransferase 
elevations, induction of clinically apparent autoimmune hepatitis, and 
reactivation of hepatitis B. However, infliximab has been most extensively used 
and studied than the other anti-TNF monoclonal antibodies, and liver injury due 
to these agents is probably class specific. For these reasons, all five of these 
agents should be considered potentially hepatotoxic, etanercept perhaps less so 
that the others. Drug Class: Antirheumatic Agents; Gastrointestinal Agents; 
Psoriasis Agents
