We have used the hamster model of antibiotic-induced Clostridium difficile 
intestinal disease to evaluate nitazoxanide (NTZ), a nitrothiazole benzamide 
antimicrobial agent. The following in vitro and in vivo activities of NTZ in the 
adult hamster were examined and compared to those of metronidazole and 
vancomycin: (i) MICs and minimum bactericidal concentrations (MBCs) against C. 
difficile, (ii) toxicity, (iii) ability to prevent C. difficile-associated 
ileocecitis, and (iv) propensity to induce C. difficile-associated ileocecitis. 
The MICs and MBCs of NTZ against 15 toxigenic strains of C. difficile were 
comparable to those of vancomycin or metronidazole. C. difficile-associated 
ileocecitis was induced with oral clindamycin and toxigenic C. difficile in a 
group of 60 hamsters. Subgroups of 10 hamsters were given six daily intragastric 
treatments of NTZ (15, 7.5, and 3.0 mg/100 g of body weight [gbw]), 
metronidazole (15 mg/100 gbw), vancomycin (5 mg/100 gbw), or saline (1 ml/100 
gbw). Animals receiving saline died 3 days post-C. difficile challenge. During 
the treatment period, NTZ (>/=7.5 mg/100 gbw), like metronidazole and 
vancomycin, prevented outward manifestations of clindamycin-induced C. difficile 
intestinal disease. Six of ten hamsters on a scheduled dose of 3.0 mg of NTZ/100 
gbw survived for the complete treatment period. Of these surviving animals, all 
but three died of C. difficile disease by between 3 and 12 days following 
discontinuation of antibiotic therapy. Another group of hamsters received six 
similar daily doses of the three antibiotics, followed by an inoculation with 
toxigenic C. difficile. All of the NTZ-treated animals survived the 15-day 
postinfection period. Upon necropsy, all hamsters appeared normal: there were no 
gross signs of toxicity or C. difficile intestinal disease, nor was C. difficile 
detected in the cultures of the ceca of these animals. By contrast, vancomycin 
and metronidazole treatment induced fatal C. difficile intestinal disease in 20 
and 70% of recipients, respectively.
