The induction of connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) was investigated in a 
human renal fibroblast cell line that exhibited many characteristics of primary 
human renal fibroblasts. Induction of CTGF mRNA was observed after treatment of 
the cells with transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) or, even more 
prominently, lysophosphatidic acid (LPA). LPA induced a rapid transient increase 
in CTGF mRNA expression, with maximal levels being observed after 1 to 2 h. This 
increase was accompanied by CTGF protein synthesis. Induction of CTGF was 
insensitive to pertussis toxin and was not dependent on the activation of p42/44 
mitogen-activated protein kinases. Inhibition of the proteins of the Rho family 
with toxin B from Clostridium difficile abrogated basal and LPA-mediated 
induction of CTGF. Specific targeting of RhoA with C3 exotoxin or of the Rho 
kinases with the inhibitor Y-27632 similarly prevented induction of CTGF, 
implicating RhoA as a signaling module downstream of LPA. Inhibition of RhoA 
depolymerized the actin cytoskeleton, as did treatment with cytochalasin D. 
Preincubation of the human renal fibroblasts with cytochalasin D prevented 
induction of CTGF by LPA, indicating a strong contribution of an intact 
cytoskeleton. Interference with RhoA signaling similarly inhibited the induction 
of CTGF by TGF-beta. Elevation of intracellular levels of cAMP and thus 
activation of protein kinase A prevented induction of CTGF expression. The 
cytoskeletal effects of cAMP, however, were reversed by LPA. These data indicate 
complex interactions involving LPA-mediated activation of RhoA- and protein 
kinase A-dependent signaling pathways. The data thus demonstrate the regulatory 
functions of the small GTPase RhoA and of an intact cytoskeleton in the 
expression of CTGF after stimulation with LPA or TGF-beta. Analogous signal 
transduction pathways were previously demonstrated in rat mesangial cells, 
suggesting a more general role for RhoA in the regulation of CTGF expression.
