This survey was undertaken to determine the relative frequency of agents that 
are currently associated with neonatal diarrhea in swine, including Clostridium 
difficile and porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV). The 
subjects for this study were the first 100 live 1-7-day-old piglets submitted to 
the Iowa State University Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory with a clinical 
signalment of diarrhea, beginning on January 1, 2000. The evaluation of each pig 
included bacterial culture of a section of ileum, 2 sections of jejunum, and a 
single section of colon; a fluorescent antibody test (FAT) or 
immunohistochemistry (IHC) for transmissible gastroenteritis virus (TGEV); 
ELISA's for rotavirus and C. difficile toxins; IHC for PRRSV; and microscopic 
examination of ileum, midjejunum, spiral colon, liver, spleen, and lung. Survey 
results demonstrate a decline in the relative number of diagnoses of TGEV, 
Escherichia coli, and Clostridium perfringens type C compared with retrospective 
data. The combined case frequency rate for these 3 pathogens dropped from 70% in 
1988 to 21% in 2000. This survey also demonstrated the emergence of C. difficile 
as an important pathogen of neonatal swine. Clostridium difficle toxin was 
detected in the colon contents of 29% of the piglets, and at least 1 
toxin-positive animal was identified in 55% of the cases. All 29 C. difficile 
toxin-positive piglets had mesocolonic edema, and colitis was observed in 21 of 
29 toxin-positive animals. PRRSV-positive macrophages were detected in the 
lamina propria of intestinal villi by IHC in 10 piglets with diarrhea. In 6 of 
these cases, PRRSV was the only pathogen detected. Gross and microscopic lung 
lesions were not a reliable indicator of PRRSV infection in these neonatal pigs 
with diarrhea. The addition of tests for C. difficile and PRRSV to a routine 
neonatal diarrhea diagnostic protocol resulted in a significant increase in 
thediagnostic success rate on both individual animal and case bases.
