The basal and lateral regions of the plasma membrane of cochlear outer hair 
cells are structurally and functionally distinct. The lateral region contains 
thousands of motor proteins but few voltage-gated channels. The basal region, 
conversely, contains a high number of voltage-gated channels but is devoid of 
motor proteins. It has been suggested that the cortical cytoskeleton is 
responsible for maintaining this regional distinction. Toward elucidating the 
structure of the outer hair cell's electromotile mechanism, we investigated the 
physical organization of the lateral plasma membrane in living guinea pig outer 
hair cells by analyzing the distribution pattern of the anionic long-chain 
carbocyanine SP-DiIC18(3) within this area, before and after electrical 
stimulation and with an intact and a disrupted cytoskeleton. We observed 
punctate, intensely fluorescent patches as well as areas of weaker fluorescence, 
with clear local maxima and minima, upon labeling the cells with this 
membrane-soluble probe. This discrete distribution of SP-DilC18(3) suggests that 
the lateral plasma membrane of guinea pig outer hair cells may be composed of 
small structural domains (microdomains). Disrupting the cytoskeleton with either 
trypsin or toxin B from Clostridium difficile did not change this pattern of 
distribution, thus indicating that this treatment did not facilitate the lateral 
diffusion of the probes. Electrical stimulation using whole-cell patch-clamp 
techniques, on the other hand, induced two responses: fast motility and 
reversible displacement of the fluorescent probes. Both responses were inhibited 
by internal perfusion with salicylate, while disruption of the cytoskeleton did 
not inhibit OHC fast motility but affected the electrically induced 
redistribution of fluorescent probes. Together, these results suggest that the 
lateral plasma membrane of guinea pig outer hair cells contains structural 
microdomains and that the cytoskeleton does not appear to be playing a major 
role in maintaining the lateral separation of these distinct molecular regions.
