Colorectal carcinogenesis is a multistep process involving genetic mutations and 
alterations in rigorously controlled signaling pathways and gene expression that 
control intestinal epithelial cell proliferation, differentiation, and 
apoptosis. Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) is aberrantly expressed in premalignant 
adenomatous polyps and colorectal carcinomas and is associated with increased 
epithelial cell proliferation, decreased apoptosis, and increased cell 
invasiveness. Currently, knowledge of the regulation of expression of COX-2 by 
endogenous cell-surface receptors is inadequate. Recently, in a non-transformed 
rat intestinal epithelial cell line (IEC-18), we showed induction of cell 
proliferation and DNA synthesis by angiotensin II (Ang II) via the endogenous 
Ang II type 1 receptor (Chiu, T., Santiskulvong, C., and Rozengurt, E. (2003) 
Am. J. Physiol. 285, G1-G11). We report that Ang II potently stimulated 
expression of COX-2 mRNA and protein as an immediate-early gene response through 
the Ang II type 1 receptor, correlating with an increase in prostaglandin I2 
production. Ang II induced Cdc42 activation and filopodial formation. COX-2 
expression was induced by epidermal growth factor (EGF), which activated Rac 
with lamellipodial formation. Inhibition of small GTPases by Clostridium 
difficile toxin B blocked COX-2 expression by Ang II and EGF. Inhibition of ERK 
activation by U0126 or PD98059 significantly decreased EGF-dependent COX-2 
expression, but did not affect Ang II-dependent COX-2 expression. Conversely, 
inhibition of p38MAPK by SB202190 or PD169316 inhibited COX-2 expression by Ang 
II, but did not block COX-2 induction by EGF. Ang II caused Ca2+ mobilization. 
Inhibition of Ca2+ signaling by 2-aminobiphenyl borate blocked Ang II-dependent 
COX-2 expression. EGF did not induce Ca2+ mobilization, and 2-aminobiphenyl 
borate did not inhibit EGF-dependent COX-2 expression. Inhibition of COX-2 
expression correlated with inhibition of prostaglandin I2 production. Luciferase 
promoter assays showed that Ang II-dependent transcriptional activation of the 
COX-2 promoter was dependent on activation of small GTPases and p38(MAPK) and on 
Ca2+ signaling via the cAMP-responsive element/activating transcription factor 
cis-acting element.
