Probiotics are defined as viable microorganisms that exhibit a beneficial effect 
on the host's health when they are ingested. Two important criteria are used for 
selection of probiotic microorganisms: they must be able to survive in the 
gastrointestinal environment and to present at least one beneficial function 
(colonization resistance, immunomodulation or nutritional contribution). 
Generally, in vitro assays demonstrating these properties were used to select 
probiotics but it is unclear if the data can be extrapolated to in vivo 
conditions. In the present work, twelve Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains 
isolated from different environments (insect association, tropical fruit, cheese 
and "aguardente" production) and pre-selected for in vitro resistance to 
simulated gastrointestinal conditions were inoculated in germ-free mice to 
evaluate their real capacity to colonize the mammal digestive tract. Using these 
data, one of the yeasts (S. cerevisiae 905) was selected and tested in 
gnotobiotic (GN) and conventional (CV) mice for its capacity to protect against 
oral challenge with two enteropathogenic bacteria (Salmonella Typhimurium and 
Clostridium difficile). The yeast reached populational levels potentially 
functional in the gastrointestinal portions where the enteropathogens tested 
act. No antagonism against either pathogenic bacterium by the yeast was observed 
in the digestive tract of GN mice but, after challenge with S. Typhimurium, 
mortality was lower and liver tissue was better preserved in CV animals treated 
with the yeast when compared with a control group (p<0.05). Histopathological 
results of intestines showed that the yeast also presented a good protective 
effect against oral challenge with C. difficile in GN mice (p<0.05). In 
conclusion, among the 12 S. cerevisiae tested, strain 905 showed the best 
characteristics to be used as a probiotic as demonstrated by survival capacity 
in the gastrointestinal tract and protective effect of animals during 
experimental infections.
