Clostridium difficile is a spore-forming, anaerobic, gram-positive bacillus that 
releases two main virulence factors: toxins A and B. Toxin A plays an important 
pathogenic role in antibiotic-induced diarrhea and pseudomembranous colitis, a 
condition characterized by intense mucosal inflammation and secretion. Agonist 
activity at A2A adenosine receptors attenuates inflammation and damage in many 
tissues. This study evaluated the effects of a new selective A2A adenosine 
receptor agonist (ATL 313) on toxin A-induced injury in murine ileal loops. ATL 
313 (0.5 to 5 nM) and/or the A2A adenosine receptor antagonist (ZM241385; 5 nM) 
or phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) were injected into ileal loops immediately 
prior to challenge with toxin A (1 to 10 microg/loop) or PBS. Intestinal fluid 
volume/length and weight/length ratios were calculated 3 h later. Ileal tissues 
were collected for the measurement of myeloperoxidase, adenosine deaminase 
activity, tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) production, histopathology, 
and detection of cell death by the TUNEL (terminal 
deoxynucleotidyltransferase-mediated dUTP-biotin nick end labeling) method. 
Toxin A significantly increased volume/length and weight/length ratios in a 
dose-dependent fashion. ATL 313 treatment significantly (P < 0.05) reduced toxin 
A-induced secretion and edema, prevented mucosal disruption, and neutrophil 
infiltration as measured by myeloperoxidase activity. ATL 313 also reduced the 
toxin A-induced TNF-alpha production and adenosine deaminase activity and 
prevented toxin A-induced cell death. These protective effects of ATL 313 were 
reversed by ZM241385. In conclusion, the A2A adenosine receptor agonist, ATL 
313, reduces tissue injury and inflammation in mice with toxin A-induced 
enteritis. The finding of increased ileal adenosine deaminase activity following 
the administration of toxin A is new and might contribute to the pathogenesis of 
the toxin A-induced enteritis by deaminating endogenous adenosine.
