OBJECTIVES: Clostridium difficile infection is a nosocomial disease of 
increasing importance. First-line treatment is limited to metronidazole or 
vancomycin. Oritavancin is a lipoglycopeptide with activity against 
Gram-positive bacteria, including drug-resistant pathogens. MICs of oritavancin, 
metronidazole and vancomycin for genotypically distinct C. difficile strains, 
including epidemic C. difficile PCR ribotypes 001 and 027, were determined by 
agar incorporation and broth macrodilution methods. In agar incorporation 
methods, the impact of supplements on oritavancin MICs was tested to address 
oritavancin binding to surfaces.
METHODS: Thirty-three genotypically distinct C. difficile strains were 
identified by PCR ribotyping. Wilkins Chalgren agar incorporation plates 
containing oritavancin, metronidazole and vancomycin were prepared with and 
without 0.002% polysorbate-80 (P80) and lysed horse blood (2%). Broth 
macrodilution MICs of oritavancin, metronidazole and vancomycin were determined 
in Brucella broth. Inoculated agar incorporation plates and broth macrodilution 
tubes were cultured anaerobically at 37 degrees C for 48 h.
RESULTS: Broth macrodilution MICs were lower than agar incorporation MICs for 
oritavancin, but not for metronidazole and vancomycin. Oritavancin broth 
macrodilution MIC(90)s were 2- to 4-fold lower than the corresponding agar 
incorporation MIC(90)s, while geometric mean MICs were >5-fold lower. 
Oritavancin broth macrodilution MIC(90)s were approximately 2- and 5-fold lower 
than those for metronidazole and vancomycin. Metronidazole was the most active 
antimicrobial agent against C. difficile using agar incorporation methods. 
Oritavancin agar incorporation MIC(90)s were unaffected by 0.002% P80 and/or 2% 
lysed horse blood.
CONCLUSIONS: Oritavancin was at least 4-fold more potent than vancomycin against 
the majority (25/33) of C. difficile strains tested by broth macrodilution. 
Oritavancin activity may be underestimated by agar incorporation methods, 
regardless of the use of P80 or lysed horse blood.
