Clostridium difficile toxin A in its native form is a high molecular weight 
(520-540 K) aggregate with five major biological activities. It is lethal, 
enterotoxic, cytotoxic and cytotonic, and induces hemagglutination of rabbit red 
blood cells. Possibly these activities are contained in separate components. A 
major subunit of c. 230-310 K has been defined but lower molecular weight 
components cannot be excluded. The major component has been cloned, and sequence 
analysis indicated a complicated pattern of repeating sequences in the 
C-terminal third of the molecule. This review deals mainly with the effects of 
toxin A on cultured cells. Most mammalian cells are sensitive to toxin A whose 
major effect is to stop cell division irreversibly. The toxin binds via its 
repeat sequences to a trisaccharide receptor expressed on rabbit red cells and 
on brush border membranes from hamster intestine. This receptor seems to be 
functional in the hemagglutination reaction and the enterotoxicity. Its role in 
the cytotoxic effect of the toxin is not clear, but no other receptor structure 
has as yet been identified. In order to exert its cytotoxic (antiproliferative) 
effect toxin A must first be internalized by endocytosis. Thus a latency period 
of at least 30 min after toxin binding to cells is consistently observed, and 
all cytotoxic effects can be prevented by blocking the endocytosis pathway. The 
first microscopically visible signs of cytotoxicity consist in retraction and 
rounding of intoxicated cells. In addition the nucleus becomes polarized to one 
side of the cell while other cell organelles are not significantly affected. 
These morphological changes seem to be the consequence of a cytoskeletal 
rearrangement, mainly involving some components of the microfilament system. 
Inhibition of macromolecular syntheses as well as permeabilization of the plasma 
membrane may follow the early cytoskeletal effects and finally lead to cell 
death. Attempts to identify metabolic pathways of significance in the 
cytotoxicity suggest that the cytosolic level of Ca2+ is not important, thus 
excluding certain mechanisms for cell killing. In this respect the cytotoxic 
mode of action of toxin A clearly differs from that of toxin B. However, the 
biochemical basis for the antiproliferative effect of toxin A remains unknown.
