REASONS FOR PERFORMING STUDY: Although antimicrobial-associated diarrhoea (AAD) 
is the most frequently observed adverse effect of antimicrobial therapy in 
horses, few multicentred studies on the prevalence of AAD have been performed.
OBJECTIVES: To determine the prevalence of AAD in horses that developed 
diarrhoea after antimicrobial treatment for nondiarrhoeic conditions and 
identify the antimicrobials used.
METHODS: The 2009 database of 3 referral hospitals was searched to identify 
nonhospitalised horses (weanling age or older) treated with antimicrobials for 
nongastrointestinal conditions. Horses with these criteria that presented with 
diarrhoea during 2009 were included in the study. Additional information, 
including antimicrobial administered and results of faecal pathogen testing, was 
gathered on each hospitalised case.
RESULTS: Of the 5251 horses treated with antimicrobials for nongastrointestinal 
signs, 32 were diagnosed with probable AAD, a prevalence of 0.6% (95% confidence 
interval: 0.43-0.86%). The AAD-diagnosed horses had an 18.8% (6/32) mortality 
rate. Horses with AAD had been treated for an average of 4.2 days. The most 
frequently used antimicrobials in horses with AAD were gentamicin in combination 
with penicillin (n = 7), enrofloxacin (n = 7) and doxycycline (n = 4). 
Clostridium difficile was identified in faecal samples from 4 horses, 2 of which 
died and Salmonella from 3 horses.
CONCLUSIONS: Results indicated that the prevalence of AAD is low. Any 
antimicrobial class commonly used in equine practice is a potential cause of 
equine AAD. Other risk factors, such as opportunistic enteropathogens, may play 
a part in the development of diarrhoea secondary to antimicrobial usage.
POTENTIAL RELEVANCE: Although the risk of equine AAD is low, this sequela of 
antimicrobial treatment is possible especially when opportunistic 
enteropathogens or other risk factors are present. Because drugs from any 
antimicrobial class can be potentially involved in AAD, clinicians have 
additional incentive to ensure the judicious use of antimicrobial agents.
