Clostridium difficile is an anaerobic, Gram-positive, spore-forming 
opportunistic pathogen and is the most common cause of hospital-acquired 
infectious diarrhea. Although iron acquisition in the host is a key to survival 
of bacterial pathogens, high levels of intracellular iron can increase oxidative 
damage. Therefore, expression of iron acquisition mechanisms is tightly 
controlled by transcriptional regulators. We identified a C. difficile homologue 
of the master bacterial iron regulator Fur. Using targetron mutagenesis, we 
generated a fur insertion mutant of C. difficile. To identify the genes 
regulated by Fur in C. difficile, we used microarray analysis to compare 
transcriptional differences between the fur mutant and the wild type when grown 
in high-iron medium. The fur mutant had increased expression of greater than 70 
transcriptional units. Using quantitative reverse transcriptase PCR (qRT-PCR), 
we analyzed several of the Fur-regulated genes identified by the microarray and 
verified that they are both iron and Fur regulated in C. difficile. Among those 
Fur- and iron-repressed genes were C. difficile genes encoding 7 putative cation 
transport systems of different classes. We found that Fur was able to bind the 
DNA upstream of three Fur-repressed genes in electrophoretic mobility shift 
assays. We also demonstrate that expression of Fur-regulated putative iron 
acquisition systems was increased during C. difficile infection using the 
hamster model. Our data suggest that C. difficile expresses multiple iron 
transport mechanisms in response iron depletion in vitro and in vivo.
IMPORTANCE: Clostridium difficile is the most common cause of hospital-acquired 
infectious diarrhea and has been recently classified as an "urgent" antibiotic 
resistance threat by the CDC. To survive and cause disease, most bacterial 
pathogens must acquire the essential enzymatic cofactor iron. While import of 
adequate iron is essential for most bacterial growth, excess intracellular iron 
can lead to extensive oxidative damage. Thus, bacteria must regulate iron import 
to maintain iron homeostasis. We demonstrate here that C. difficile regulates 
expression of several putative iron acquisition systems using the 
transcriptional regulator Fur. These import mechanisms are induced under 
iron-limiting conditions in vitro and during C. difficile infection of the host. 
This suggests that during a C. difficile infection, iron availability is limited 
in vivo.
