The gastrointestinal tract is continuously exposed to a variety of chemicals and 
commensal bacteria. Recent studies have shown that changes in gut microbial 
populations caused by chlorine or other chemicals in the drinking water 
influence the development of human colorectal cancer, although the mechanism of 
tumorigenesis in the gut epithelium is obfuscated by the diversity of microflora 
and complexity of the tumor microenvironment. In this regard, mouse models that 
recapitulate human colorectal cancer are an invaluable tool. In this study, we 
used two conditional adenomatous polyposis coli (Apc) knockout mouse models to 
investigate the effect of chlorinated water on tumorigenesis in the digestive 
tract. Mice with colon-specific carcinoma--caused by either chromosomal (CDX2P 
9.5-NLS Cre;Apc(+/flox), abbreviated to CPC;Apc) or microsatellite 
(CDX2P9.5-G19Cre;Apc(flox/flox) and CDX2P9.5-G22Cre;Apc(flox/flox)) instability, 
respectively--were administered chlorinated (10.0 mg/L chlorine) or tap (0.7 
mg/L chlorine) water and evaluated for colon polyp formation. In CPC;Apc mice 
given chlorinated drinking water, tumors tended to develop in the colon, whereas 
in those that drank tap water, tumors were mostly observed in the small 
intestine. There was no difference in the rate of tumor formation of 
CDX2P9.5-G19Cre;Apc(flox/flox) and CDX2P9.5-G22Cre;Apc(flox/flox) mice consuming 
chlorinated as compared to tap water, suggesting that microsatellite instability 
in the Apc gene does not significantly affect tumorigenesis. Chlorinated water 
altered the enteric environment by reducing the fecal populations of the 
obligatory anaerobes Clostridium perfringens and C. difficile, as well as 
species belonging to the Atopobium cluster, including Enterobacteriaceae and 
Staphylococcus sp., which was associated with colon tumorigenesis in CPC;Apc 
mice. These results suggest that differences in tumorigenesis among CPC;Apc mice 
consuming chlorinated versus tap water may be due to differences in 
gastrointestinal commensal populations.
