It is hypothesized that the depletion of microbial members responsible for 
converting primary bile acids into secondary bile acids reduces resistance to 
Clostridium difficile colonization. To date, inhibition of C. difficile growth 
by secondary bile acids has only been shown in vitro. Using targeted bile acid 
metabolomics, we sought to define the physiologically relevant concentrations of 
primary and secondary bile acids present in the murine small and large 
intestinal tracts and how these impact C. difficile dynamics. We treated mice 
with a variety of antibiotics to create distinct microbial and metabolic (bile 
acid) environments and directly tested their ability to support or inhibit 
C. difficile spore germination and outgrowth ex vivo. Susceptibility to 
C. difficile in the large intestine was observed only after specific 
broad-spectrum antibiotic treatment (cefoperazone, clindamycin, and vancomycin) 
and was accompanied by a significant loss of secondary bile acids (deoxycholate, 
lithocholate, ursodeoxycholate, hyodeoxycholate, and ω-muricholate). These 
changes were correlated to the loss of specific microbiota community members, 
the Lachnospiraceae and Ruminococcaceae families. Additionally, physiological 
concentrations of secondary bile acids present during C. difficile resistance 
were able to inhibit spore germination and outgrowth in vitro. Interestingly, we 
observed that C. difficile spore germination and outgrowth were supported 
constantly in murine small intestinal content regardless of antibiotic 
perturbation, suggesting that targeting growth of C. difficile will prove most 
important for future therapeutics and that antibiotic-related changes are organ 
specific. Understanding how the gut microbiota regulates bile acids throughout 
the intestine will aid the development of future therapies for C. difficile 
infection and other metabolically relevant disorders such as obesity and 
diabetes. IMPORTANCE Antibiotics alter the gastrointestinal microbiota, allowing 
for Clostridium difficile infection, which is a significant public health 
problem. Changes in the structure of the gut microbiota alter the metabolome, 
specifically the production of secondary bile acids. Specific bile acids are 
able to initiate C. difficile spore germination and also inhibit C. difficile 
growth in vitro, although no study to date has defined physiologically relevant 
bile acids in the gastrointestinal tract. In this study, we define the bile 
acids C. difficile spores encounter in the small and large intestines before and 
after various antibiotic treatments. Antibiotics that alter the gut microbiota 
and deplete secondary bile acid production allow C. difficile colonization, 
representing a mechanism of colonization resistance. Multiple secondary bile 
acids in the large intestine were able to inhibit C. difficile spore germination 
and growth at physiological concentrations and represent new targets to combat 
C. difficile in the large intestine.
