Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is responsible for most of the definable 
cases of antibiotic- and hospital-associated diarrhea worldwide and is a 
frequent cause of morbidity and mortality in older patients. C. difficile, a 
multidrug-resistant anaerobic pathogen, causes disease by producing toxins A and 
B, which are controlled by an accessory gene regulator (Agr) quorum signaling 
system. Some C. difficile strains encode two Agr loci in their genomes, 
designated agr1 and agr2 The agr1 locus is present in all of the C. difficile 
strains sequenced to date, whereas the agr2 locus is present in a few strains. 
The functional roles of agr1 and agr2 in C. difficile toxin regulation and 
pathogenesis were unknown until now. Using allelic exchange, we deleted 
components of both agr loci and examined the mutants for toxin production and 
virulence. The results showed that the agr1 mutant cannot produce toxins A and 
B; toxin production can be restored by complementation with wild-type agr1 
Furthermore, the agr1 mutant is able to colonize but unable to cause disease in 
a murine CDI model. These findings have profound implications for CDI treatment 
because we have uncovered a promising therapeutic target for the development of 
nonantibiotic drugs to treat this life-threatening emerging pathogen by 
targeting the toxins directly responsible for disease.
IMPORTANCE: Within the last decade, the number of cases of C. difficile 
infections has been increasing exponentially in the United States, resulting in 
about 4.8 billion U.S. dollars in health care costs annually. As a 
multidrug-resistant, spore-forming, anaerobic pathogen, C. difficile 
overpopulates the colon after the gut microbiota has been altered by antibiotic 
therapy. With increasing resistance to antibiotic treatment of C. difficile 
infections, patients are experiencing higher costs of health care and a lower 
quality of life as treatment options decrease. During infection, C. difficile 
produces toxins A and B, which directly cause disease. As a result, the toxins 
have become promising nonantibiotic treatment targets. Here, we have identified 
a pathway responsible for activating the production of the toxins. This 
important finding opens up a unique therapeutic target for the development of a 
novel nonantibiotic therapy for C. difficile infections.
