Clostridium difficile is the number one cause of nosocomial 
antibiotic-associated diarrhea in developed countries. Historically, 
pathogenesis was attributed two homologous glucosylating toxins, toxin-A (TcdA) 
and toxin-B (TcdB). Over the past decade, however, highly virulent epidemic 
strains of C. difficile (B1/NAP1/027) have emerged and are linked to an increase 
in morbidity and mortality. Increased virulence is attributed to multiple 
factors including: increased production of A- and B-toxins; production of binary 
toxin (CDT); and the emergence of more toxic TcdB variants (TcdB(027)). 
TcdB(027) is more cytotoxicity to cells; causes greater tissue damage and 
toxicity in animals; and is antigenically distinct from historical TcdB 
(TcdB(003)). Broadly protective vaccines and therapeutic antibody strategies, 
therefore, may target TcdA, TcdB variants and CDT. To facilitate the generation 
of multivalent toxin-based C. difficile vaccines and therapeutic antibodies, we 
have generated fusion proteins constructed from the receptor binding domains 
(RBD) of TcdA, TcdB(003), TcdB(027) and CDT. Herein, we describe the development 
of a trivalent toxin (T-toxin) vaccine (CDTb/TcdB(003)/TcdA) and quadravalent 
toxin (Q-toxin) vaccine (CDTb/TcB(003)/TcdA/TcdB(027)) fusion proteins that 
retain the protective toxin neutralizing epitopes. Active immunization of mice 
or hamsters with T-toxin or Q-toxin fusion protein vaccines elicited the 
generation of toxin neutralizing antibodies to each of the toxins. Hamsters 
immunized with the Q-toxin vaccine were broadly protected against spore 
challenge with historical C. difficile 630 (toxinotype 0/ribotype 003) and 
epidemic NAP1 (toxinotype III/ribotype 027) strains. Fully human polyclonal 
antitoxin IgG was produced by immunization of transgenic bovine with these 
fusion proteins. In passive transfer studies, mice were protected against lethal 
toxin challenge. Hamsters treated with human antitoxin IgG were completely 
protected when challenged with historical or epidemic strains of C. difficile. 
The use of chimeric fusion proteins is an attractive approach to producing 
multivalent antitoxin vaccines and therapeutic polyclonal antibodies for 
prevention and treatment of C. difficile infections (CDI).
