Clostridium difficile is the largest single cause of hospital-acquired infection 
in the United States. A major risk factor for Clostridium difficile infection 
(CDI) is prior exposure to antibiotics, as they disrupt the gut bacterial 
community which protects from C. difficile colonization. Multiple antibiotic 
classes have been associated with CDI susceptibility, many leading to distinct 
community structures stemming from variation in bacterial targets of action. 
These community structures present separate metabolic challenges to 
C. difficile. Therefore, we hypothesized that the pathogen adapts its physiology 
to the nutrients within different gut environments. Utilizing an in vivo CDI 
model, we demonstrated that C. difficile highly colonized ceca of mice 
pretreated with any of three antibiotics from distinct classes. Levels of 
C. difficile spore formation and toxin activity varied between animals based on 
the antibiotic pretreatment. These physiologic processes in C. difficile are 
partially regulated by environmental nutrient concentrations. To investigate 
metabolic responses of the bacterium in vivo, we performed transcriptomic 
analysis of C. difficile from ceca of infected mice across pretreatments. This 
revealed heterogeneous expression in numerous catabolic pathways for diverse 
growth substrates. To assess which resources C. difficile exploited, we 
developed a genome-scale metabolic model with a transcriptome-enabled metabolite 
scoring algorithm integrating network architecture. This platform identified 
nutrients that C. difficile used preferentially between pretreatments, which 
were validated through untargeted mass spectrometry of each microbiome. Our 
results supported the hypothesis that C. difficile inhabits alternative nutrient 
niches across cecal microbiomes with increased preference for 
nitrogen-containing carbon sources, particularly Stickland fermentation 
substrates and host-derived glycans. IMPORTANCE Infection by the bacterium 
Clostridium difficile causes an inflammatory diarrheal disease which can become 
life threatening and has grown to be the most prevalent nosocomial infection. 
Susceptibility to C. difficile infection is strongly associated with previous 
antibiotic treatment, which disrupts the gut microbiota and reduces its ability 
to prevent colonization. In this study, we demonstrated that C. difficile 
altered pathogenesis between hosts pretreated with antibiotics from separate 
classes and exploited different nutrient sources across these environments. Our 
metabolite score calculation also provides a platform to study nutrient 
requirements of pathogens during an infection. Our results suggest that 
C. difficile colonization resistance is mediated by multiple groups of bacteria 
competing for several subsets of nutrients and could explain why total 
reintroduction of competitors through fecal microbial transplant currently is 
the most effective treatment for recurrent CDI. This work could ultimately 
contribute to the identification of targeted, context-dependent measures that 
prevent or reduce C. difficile colonization, including pre- and probiotic 
therapies.
