BACKGROUND: Approximately 30-40% of children <1 year of age are Clostridium 
difficile colonized, and may represent a reservoir for adult C. difficile 
infections (CDI). Risk factors for colonization with toxigenic versus 
non-toxigenic C. difficile strains and longitudinal acquisition dynamics in 
infants remain incompletely characterized.
METHODS: Predominantly healthy infants (≤2 years) were recruited in Oxfordshire, 
UK, and provided ≥1 fecal samples. Independent risk factors for 
toxigenic/non-toxigenic C. difficile colonization and acquisition were 
identified using multivariable regression. Infant C. difficile isolates were 
whole-genome sequenced to assay genetic diversity and prevalence of 
toxin-associated genes, and compared with sequenced strains from Oxfordshire CDI 
cases.
RESULTS: 338/365 enrolled infants provided 1332 fecal samples, representing 158 
C. difficile colonization or carriage episodes (107[68%] toxigenic). Initial 
colonization was associated with age, and reduced with breastfeeding but 
increased with pet dogs. Acquisition was associated with older age, Caesarean 
delivery, and diarrhea. Breastfeeding and pre-existing C. difficile colonization 
reduced acquisition risk. Overall 13% of CDI C. difficile strains were 
genetically related to infant strains. 29(18%) infant C. difficile sequences 
were consistent with recent direct/indirect transmission to/from Oxfordshire CDI 
cases (≤2 single nucleotide variants [SNVs]); 79(50%) shared a common origin 
with an Oxfordshire CDI case within the last ~5 years (0-10 SNVs). The 
hypervirulent, epidemic ST1/ribotype 027 remained notably absent in infants in 
this large study, as did other lineages such as STs 10/44 (ribotype 015); the 
most common strain in infants was ST2 (ribotype 020/014)(22%).
CONCLUSIONS: In predominantly healthy infants without significant healthcare 
exposure C. difficile colonization and acquisition reflect environmental 
exposures, with pet dogs identified as a novel risk factor. Genetic overlap 
between some infant strains and those isolated from CDI cases suggest common 
community reservoirs of these C. difficile lineages, contrasting with those 
lineages found only in CDI cases, and therefore more consistent with 
healthcare-associated spread.
