BACKGROUND & AIMS: Clostridium difficile induces intestinal inflammation by 
releasing toxins A and B. The antimicrobial compound cationic steroid 
antimicrobial 13 (CSA13) has been developed for treating gastrointestinal 
infections. The CSA13-Eudragit formulation can be given orally and releases 
CSA13 in the terminal ileum and colon. We investigated whether this form of 
CSA13 reduces C difficile infection (CDI) in mice.
METHODS: C57BL/6J mice were infected with C difficile on day 0, followed by 
subcutaneous administration of pure CSA13 or oral administration of 
CSA13-Eudragit (10 mg/kg/d for 10 days). Some mice were given intraperitoneal 
vancomycin (50 mg/kg daily) on days 0-4 and relapse was measured after 
antibiotic withdrawal. The mice were monitored until day 20; colon and fecal 
samples were collected on day 3 for analysis. Blood samples were collected for 
flow cytometry analyses. Fecal pellets were collected each day from mice 
injected with CSA13 and analyzed by high-performance liquid chromatography or 
16S sequencing; feces were also homogenized in phosphate-buffered saline and fed 
to mice with CDI via gavage.
RESULTS: CDI of mice caused 60% mortality, significant bodyweight loss, and 
colonic damage 3 days after infection; these events were prevented by 
subcutaneous injection of CSA13 or oral administration CSA13-Eudragit. There was 
reduced relapse of CDI after administration of CSA13 was stopped. Levels of 
CSA13 in feces from mice given CSA13-Eudragit were significantly higher than 
those of mice given subcutaneous CSA13. Subcutaneous and oral CSA13 each 
significantly increased the abundance of Peptostreptococcaceae bacteria and 
reduced the abundance of C difficile in fecal samples of mice. When feces from 
mice with CDI and given CSA13 were fed to mice with CDI that had not received 
CSA13, the recipient mice had significantly increased rates of survival. CSA13 
reduced fecal levels of inflammatory metabolites (endocannabinoids) and 
increased fecal levels of 4 protective metabolites (ie, citrulline, 
3-aminoisobutyric acid, retinol, and ursodeoxycholic acid) in mice with CDI. 
Oral administration of these CSA13-dependent protective metabolites reduced the 
severity of CDI.
CONCLUSIONS: In studies of mice, we found the CSA13-Eudragit formulation to be 
effective in eradicating CDI by modulating the intestinal microbiota and 
metabolites.
