Lantibiotics offer an untapped pipeline for the development of novel antibiotics 
to treat serious Gram-positive (+) infections including Clostridium difficile. 
Mutacin 1140 (MU1140) is a lantibiotic produced by Streptococcus mutans and acts 
via a novel mechanism of action, which may limit the development of resistance. 
This study sought to identify a lead compound for the treatment of C. difficile 
associated diarrhea (CDAD). Compounds were selected from a saturation 
mutagenesis library of 418 single amino acid variants of MU1140. Compounds were 
produced by small scale fermentation, purified, characterized and then subjected 
to a panel of assays aimed at identifying the best performers. The screening 
assays included: in vitro susceptibility testing [MIC against Micrococcus 
luteus, Clostridium difficile, vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE), 
Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus pneumonia, Mycobacterium phlei, and 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa; cytotoxicity screening on HepG2 hepatocytes; in vitro 
pharmacological profiling with the Safety Screen 44TM, metabolic and chemical 
stability in biologically relevant fluids (FaSSGF, FaSSIF and serum); and 
efficacy in vivo]. Several lantibiotic compounds had better MIC against C. 
difficile, compared to vancomycin, but not against other bacterial species 
tested. The Safety Screen 44TMin vitro pharmacological profiling assay suggested 
that this class of compounds has relatively low overall toxicity and that 
compound OG253 (MU1140, Phe1Ile) is not likely to present inadvertent off-target 
effects, as evidenced by a low promiscuity score. The in vitro cytotoxicity 
assay also indicated that this class of compounds was characterized by low 
toxicity; the EC50 of OG253 was 636 mg/mL on HepG2 cells. The half-life in 
simulated gastric fluid was >240 min. for all compound tested. The stability in 
simulated intestinal fluid ranged between a half-life of 5 min to >240 min, and 
paralleled the half-life in serum. OG253 ultimately emerged as the lead compound 
based on superior in vivo efficacy along with an apparent lack of relapse in a 
hamster model of infection. The lessons learned from this report are applicable 
to therapeutic lanthipeptides in general and may assist in the design of novel 
molecules with improved pharmacological, therapeutic and physicochemical 
profiles. The data presented also support the continued clinical development of 
OG253 as a novel antibiotic against CDAD that could prevent recurrence of the 
infection.
