Toxin-producing strains of Clostridioides difficile and Clostridium perfringens 
cause infections of the gastrointestinal tract in humans and ruminants, with the 
toxins being major virulence factors, essential for the infection, and 
responsible for the onset of severe symptoms. C. difficile toxin A (TcdA) and 
toxin B (TcdB), and the large cytotoxin (TpeL) from C. perfringens are single 
chain bacterial protein toxins with an AB-like toxin structure. The C-terminal 
delivery domain mediates cell entry of the N-terminal glycosyltransferase domain 
by receptor-mediated endocytosis. Several cell surface proteins have been 
proposed to serve as toxin receptors, including chondroitin-sulfate proteoglycan 
4 (CSPG4), poliovirus receptor-like 3 (PVRL3), and frizzled-1/2/7 (FZD1/2/7) for 
TcdB and LDL-receptor-related protein-1 (LRP1) for TpeL. The expression of the 
TcdB receptors was investigated in human intestinal organoids (HIOs) and in 
cultured cell lines. HIOs from four human donors exhibited a comparable profile 
of receptor expression, with PVRL3, LRP1, and FZD7 being expressed and CSPG4 and 
FZD2 not being expressed. In human epithelial Caco-2 cells and HT29 cells as 
well as in immortalized murine fibroblasts, either receptor FZD2/7, CSPG4, 
PVRL3, and LRP1 was expressed. The question whether the toxins take advantage of 
the normal turnover of their receptors (i.e., constitutive endocytosis and 
recycling) from the cell surface or whether the toxins activity induce the 
internalization of their receptors has not yet been addressed. For the analysis 
of receptor internalization, temperature-induced uptake of biotinylated toxin 
receptors into immortalized mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) and Caco-2 cells 
was exploited. Solely LRP1 exhibited constitutive endocytosis from the plasma 
membrane to the endosome, which might be abused by TpeL (and possibly TcdB as 
well) for cell entry. Furthermore, internalization of CSPG4, PVRL3, FZD2, and 
FZD7 was observed neither in MEFs nor in Caco-2 cells. FZD2/7, CSPG4, and PVRL3 
did thus exhibit no constitutive recycling. The presence of TcdB and the p38 
activation induced by anisomycin were not able to induce or enhance CSPG4 or 
PVRL3 uptake in MEFs. In conclusion, FZD2/7, CSPG4, and PVRL3 seem to serve as 
cell surface binding receptors rather than internalizing receptors of TcdB.
