BACKGROUND & AIMS: Fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) is effective for 
treating recurrent Clostridioides difficile infection (CDI), but there are 
concerns about its long-term safety. Understanding the mechanisms of the effects 
of FMT could help us design safer, targeted therapies. We aimed to identify 
microbial metabolites that are important for C difficile growth.
METHODS: We used a CDI chemostat model as a tool to study the effects of FMT 
in vitro. The following analyses were performed: C difficile plate counts, 16S 
rRNA gene sequencing, proton nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, and 
ultra-performance liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry bile acid 
profiling. FMT mixtures were prepared using fresh fecal samples provided by 
donors enrolled in an FMT program in the United Kingdom. Results from chemostat 
experiments were validated using human stool samples, C difficile batch 
cultures, and C57BL/6 mice with CDI. Human stool samples were collected from 16 
patients with recurrent CDI and healthy donors (n = 5) participating in an FMT 
trial in Canada.
RESULTS: In the CDI chemostat model, clindamycin decreased valerate and 
deoxycholic acid concentrations and increased C difficile total viable counts 
and valerate precursors, taurocholic acid, and succinate concentrations. After 
we stopped adding clindamycin, levels of bile acids and succinate recovered, 
whereas levels of valerate and valerate precursors did not. In the CDI chemostat 
model, FMT increased valerate concentrations and decreased C difficile total 
viable counts (94% decrease), spore counts (86% decrease), and valerate 
precursor concentrations; concentrations of bile acids were unchanged. In stool 
samples from patients with CDI, valerate was depleted before FMT but restored 
after FMT. Clostridioides difficile batch cultures confirmed that valerate 
decreased vegetative growth, and that taurocholic acid was required for 
germination but had no effect on vegetative growth. Clostridioides difficile 
total viable counts were decreased by 95% in mice with CDI given glycerol 
trivalerate compared with phosphate buffered saline.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified valerate as a metabolite that is depleted with 
clindamycin and only recovered with FMT. Valerate is a target for a rationally 
designed recurrent CDI therapy.
