Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) causes nosocomial/antibiotic-associated 
diarrhea and pseudomembranous colitis, with dramatic incidence/mortality 
worldwide. C. difficile virulence factors are toxin A and toxin B (TcdB) which 
cause cytopathic/cytotoxic effects and inflammation. Until now studies were 
focused on molecular effects of C. difficile toxins (Tcds) on different cells 
while unexplored aspect is the status/fate of cells that survived their 
cytotoxicity. Recently we demonstrated that enteric glial cells (EGCs) are 
susceptible to TcdB cytotoxicity, but several EGCs survived and were 
irreversibly cell-cycle arrested and metabolically active, suggesting that EGCs 
could became senescent. This is important because allowed us to evaluate the not 
explored status/fate of cells surviving Tcds cytotoxicity, and particularly if 
TcdB induces senescence in EGCs. Rat-transformed EGCs were treated with 10 ng/ml 
TcdB for 6 h-48 h, or for 48 h, followed by incubation for additional 4 or 
11 days in absence of TcdB (6 or 13 total days). Senescence markers/effectors 
were examined by specific assays. TcdB induces senescence in EGCs, as 
demonstrated by the senescence markers: irreversible cell-cycle arrest, 
senescence-associated-β‑galactosidase positivity, flat morphology, early and 
persistent DNA damage (ATM and H2AX phosphorylation), p27 overexpression, pRB 
hypophosphorylation, c‑Myc, cyclin B1, cdc2 and phosphorylated-cdc2 
downregulation, Sirtuin‑2 and Sirtuin‑3 overexpression. TcdB-induced EGC 
senescence is dependent by JNK and AKT activation but independent by ROS, p16 
and p53/p21 pathways. In conclusion, TcdB induces senescence in EGCs. The 
extrapolation of these results to CDI leads to hypothesize that EGCs that 
survived TcdB, once they have acquired a senescence state, could cause irritable 
bowel syndrome (IBS), inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), and tumors due to 
persistent inflammation, transfer of senescence status and stimulation of 
pre-neoplastic cells.
