Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is a major public health threat worldwide. 
The use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) is associated with 
enhanced susceptibility to and severity of CDI; however, the mechanisms driving 
this phenomenon have not been elucidated. NSAIDs alter prostaglandin (PG) 
metabolism by inhibiting cyclooxygenase (COX) enzymes. Here, we found that 
treatment with the NSAID indomethacin prior to infection altered the microbiota 
and dramatically increased mortality and the intestinal pathology associated 
with CDI in mice. We demonstrated that in C. difficile-infected animals, 
indomethacin treatment led to PG deregulation, an altered proinflammatory 
transcriptional and protein profile, and perturbed epithelial cell junctions. 
These effects were paralleled by increased recruitment of intestinal neutrophils 
and CD4+ cells and also by a perturbation of the gut microbiota. Together, these 
data implicate NSAIDs in the disruption of protective COX-mediated PG production 
during CDI, resulting in altered epithelial integrity and associated immune 
responses.IMPORTANCE Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is a spore-forming 
anaerobic bacterium and leading cause of antibiotic-associated colitis. 
Epidemiological data suggest that use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs) increases the risk for CDI in humans, a potentially important 
observation given the widespread use of NSAIDs. Prior studies in rodent models 
of CDI found that NSAID exposure following infection increases the severity of 
CDI, but mechanisms to explain this are lacking. Here we present new data from a 
mouse model of antibiotic-associated CDI suggesting that brief NSAID exposure 
prior to CDI increases the severity of the infectious colitis. These data shed 
new light on potential mechanisms linking NSAID use to worsened CDI, including 
drug-induced disturbances to the gut microbiome and colonic epithelial 
integrity. Studies were limited to a single NSAID (indomethacin), so future 
studies are needed to assess the generalizability of our findings and to 
establish a direct link to the human condition.
