Streptococcus suis is a zoonotic pathogen that harbors anti-oxidative stress 
genes, which have been reported to be associated with virulence. Serial passage 
has been widely used to obtain phenotypic variant strains to investigate the 
functions of important genes. In the present study, S. suis serotype 9 strain 
DN13 was serially passaged in mice 30 times. The virulence of a single colony 
from passage 10 (SS9-P10) was found to increase by at least 140-fold as 
indicated by LD50 values, and the increased virulence was stable for single 
colonies from passage 20 (SS0-P20) and 30 (SS0-P30). Compared to the parental 
strain, the mouse-adapted strains were more tolerant to oxidative and high 
temperature stress. Genome-wide analysis of nucleotide variations found that 
reverse mutations occurred in seven genes, as indicated by BLAST analysis. Three 
of the reverse mutation genes or their homologs in other bacteria were reported 
to be virulence-associated, including ide Ssuis in S. suis, a homolog of malR of 
Streptococcus pneumoniae, and a homolog of the prepilin peptidase-encoding gene 
in Legionella pneumophila. However, these genes were not involved in the stress 
response. Another gene, srtR (stress response transcriptional regulator), 
encoding an XRE family transcriptional regulator, which had an internal stop in 
the parental strain, was functionally restored in the adapted strains. Further 
analysis of DN13 and SS9-P10-background srtR-knock-out and complementing strains 
supported the contribution of this gene to stress tolerance in vitro and 
virulence in mice. srtR and its homologs are widely distributed in Gram-positive 
bacteria including several important human pathogens such as Enterococcus 
faecium and Clostridioides difficile, indicating similar functions in these 
bacteria. Taken together, our study identified the first member of the XRE 
family of transcriptional regulators that is involved in stress tolerance and 
virulence. It also provides insight into the mechanism of enhanced virulence 
after serial passage in experimental animals.
