The increasing clinical importance of human infections (frequently severe) 
caused by Clostridium difficile PCR ribotype 078 (RT078) was first reported in 
2008. The severity of symptoms (mortality of ≤30%) and the higher proportion of 
infections among community and younger patients raised concerns. Farm animals, 
especially pigs, have been identified as RT078 reservoirs. We aimed to 
understand the recent changes in RT078 epidemiology by investigating a possible 
role for antimicrobial selection in its recent evolutionary history. 
Phylogenetic analysis of international RT078 genomes (isolates from 2006 to 
2014, n = 400), using time-scaled, recombination-corrected, maximum likelihood 
phylogenies, revealed several recent clonal expansions. A common ancestor of 
each expansion had independently acquired a different allele of the tetracycline 
resistance gene tetM Consequently, an unusually high proportion (76.5%) of RT078 
genomes were tetM positive. Multiple additional tetracycline resistance 
determinants were also identified (including efflux pump tet40), frequently 
sharing a high level of nucleotide sequence identity (up to 100%) with sequences 
found in the pig pathogen Streptococcus suis and in other zoonotic pathogens 
such as Campylobacter jejuni and Campylobacter coli Each RT078 tetM clonal 
expansion lacked geographic structure, indicating rapid, recent international 
spread. Resistance determinants for C. difficile infection-triggering 
antimicrobials, including fluoroquinolones and clindamycin, were comparatively 
rare in RT078. Tetracyclines are used intensively in agriculture; this selective 
pressure, plus rapid, international spread via the food chain, may explain the 
increased RT078 prevalence in humans. Our work indicates that the use of 
antimicrobials outside the health care environment has selected for resistant 
organisms, and in the case of RT078, has contributed to the emergence of a human 
pathogen.IMPORTANCE Clostridium difficile PCR ribotype 078 (RT078) has multiple 
reservoirs; many are agricultural. Since 2005, this genotype has been 
increasingly associated with human infections in both clinical settings and the 
community. Investigations of RT078 whole-genome sequences revealed that 
tetracycline resistance had been acquired on multiple independent occasions. 
Phylogenetic analysis revealed a rapid, recent increase in numbers of closely 
related tetracycline-resistant RT078 (clonal expansions), suggesting that 
tetracycline selection has strongly influenced its recent evolutionary history. 
We demonstrate recent international spread of emergent, tetracycline-resistant 
RT078. A similar tetracycline-positive clonal expansion was also identified in 
unrelated nontoxigenic C. difficile, suggesting that this process may be 
widespread and may be independent of disease-causing ability. Resistance to 
typical C. difficile infection-associated antimicrobials (e.g., 
fluoroquinolones, clindamycin) occurred only sporadically within RT078. 
Selective pressure from tetracycline appears to be a key factor in the emergence 
of this human pathogen and the rapid international dissemination that followed, 
plausibly via the food chain.
