Clostridioides difficile infection (CDI) is an emerging public health threat and 
C. difficile is the most common cause of antimicrobial-associated diarrhea 
worldwide and the leading cause of hospital-associated infections in the US, yet 
the burden of community-acquired infections (CAI) is poorly understood. 
Characterizing C. difficile isolated from canines is important for understanding 
the role that canines may play in CAI. In addition, several studies have 
suggested that canines carry toxigenic C. difficile asymptomatically, which may 
imply that there are mechanisms responsible for resistance to CDI in canines 
that could be exploited to help combat human CDI. To assess the virulence 
potential of canine-derived C. difficile, we tested whether toxins TcdA and TcdB 
(hereafter toxins) derived from a canine isolate were capable of causing tight 
junction disruptions to colonic epithelial cells. Additionally, we addressed 
whether major differences exist between human and canine cells regarding 
C. difficile pathogenicity by exposing them to identical toxins. We then 
examined the canine gut microbiome associated with C. difficile carriage using 
16S rRNA gene sequencing and searched for deviations from homeostasis as an 
indicator of CDI. Finally, we queried 16S rRNA gene sequences for bacterial taxa 
that may be associated with resistance to CDI in canines. Clostridioides 
difficile isolated from a canine produced toxins that reduced tight junction 
integrity in both human and canine cells in vitro. However, canine guts were not 
dysbiotic in the presence of C. difficile. These findings support asymptomatic 
carriage in canines and, furthermore, suggest that there are features of the gut 
microbiome and/or a canine-specific immune response that may protect canines 
against CDI. We identified two biologically relevant bacteria that may aid in 
CDI resistance in canines: 1) Clostridium hiranonis, which synthesizes secondary 
bile acids that have been shown to provide resistance to CDI in mice; and 2) 
Sphingobacterium faecium, which produces sphingophospholipids that may be 
associated with regulating homeostasis in the canine gut. Our findings suggest 
that canines may be cryptic reservoirs for C. difficile and, furthermore, that 
mechanisms of CDI resistance in the canine gut could provide insights into 
targeted therapeutics for human CDI.
