Antibiotics damage the gut microbiome, which can result in overgrowth of 
pathogenic microorganisms and emergence of antibiotic resistance. Inactivation 
of antibiotics in the small intestine represents a novel strategy to protect the 
colonic microbiota. SYN-004 (ribaxamase) is a beta-lactamase formulated for oral 
delivery intended to degrade intravenously administered beta-lactam antibiotics 
in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. The enteric coating of ribaxamase protects 
the enzyme from stomach acid and mediates pH-dependent release in the upper 
small intestine, the site of antibiotic biliary excretion. Clinical benefit was 
established in animal and human studies in which ribaxamase was shown to degrade 
ceftriaxone in the GI tract, thereby preserving the gut microbiome, 
significantly reducing Clostridioides difficile disease, and attenuating 
antibiotic resistance. To expand ribaxamase utility to oral beta-lactams, 
delayed release formulations of ribaxamase, SYN-007, were engineered to allow 
enzyme release in the lower small intestine, distal to the site of oral 
antibiotic absorption. Based on in vitro dissolution profiles, three SYN-007 
formulations were selected for evaluation in a canine model of 
antibiotic-mediated gut dysbiosis. Dogs received amoxicillin (40 mg/kg, PO, TID) 
+/- SYN-007 (10 mg, PO, TID) for five days. Serum amoxicillin levels were 
measured after the first and last antibiotic doses and gut microbiomes were 
evaluated using whole genome shotgun sequence metagenomics analyses of fecal DNA 
prior to and after antibiotic treatment. Serum amoxicillin levels did not 
significantly differ +/- SYN-007 after the first dose for all SYN-007 
formulations, while only one SYN-007 formulation did not significantly reduce 
systemic antibiotic concentrations after the last dose. Gut microbiomes of 
animals receiving amoxicillin alone displayed significant loss of diversity and 
emergence of antibiotic resistance genes. In contrast, for animals receiving 
amoxicillin + SYN-007, microbiome diversities were not altered significantly and 
the presence of antibiotic resistance genes was reduced. These data demonstrate 
that SYN-007 diminishes amoxicillin-mediated microbiome disruption and mitigates 
emergence and propagation of antibiotic resistance genes without interfering 
with antibiotic systemic absorption. Thus, SYN-007 has the potential to protect 
the gut microbiome by inactivation of beta-lactam antibiotics when administered 
by both oral and parenteral routes and to reduce emergence of 
antibiotic-resistant pathogens.
