BACKGROUND: Scents and odours characterize some microbes when grown in the 
laboratory, and experienced clinicians can diagnose patients with some 
infectious diseases based on their smell. Animal sniffing is an innate 
behaviour, and animals' olfactory acuity is used for detecting people, weapons, 
bombs, narcotics and food.
OBJECTIVES: We briefly summarized current knowledge regarding the use of 
sniffing animals to diagnose some infectious diseases and the potential use of 
scent-based diagnostic instruments in microbiology.
SOURCES: Information was sought through PubMed and extracted from peer-reviewed 
literature published between January 2000 and September 2019 and from reliable 
online news. The search terms 'odour', 'scent', 'bacteria', 'diagnostics', 
'tuberculosis', 'malaria' and 'volatile compounds' were used.
CONTENT: Four major areas of using sniffing animals are summarized. Dogs have 
been used to reliably detect stool associated with toxigenic Clostridioides 
difficile and for surveillance. Dogs showed high sensitivity and moderate 
specificity for detecting urinary tract infections in comparison to culture, 
especially for Escherichia coli. African giant pouched rats showed superiority 
for diagnosing tuberculosis over microscopy, but inferiority to 
culture/molecular methods. Several approaches for detecting malaria by analysing 
host skin odour or exhaled breath have been explored successfully. Some 
microbial infections produce specific volatile organic compounds (VOCs), which 
can be analysed by spectrometry, metabolomics or other analytical approaches to 
replace animal sniffing.
IMPLICATIONS: The results of sniffing animal studies are fascinating, and animal 
sniffing can provide intermediate diagnostic solutions for some infectious 
diseases. Lack of reproducibility, and cost of animal training and housing are 
major drawbacks for wider implementation of sniffing animals. The ultimate goal 
is to understand the biological background of this animal ability and to 
characterize the specific VOCs that animals are recognizing. VOC identification, 
improvement of odour sampling methods and development of point-of-care 
instruments could allow implementation of scent-based tests for major human 
pathogens.
