The intestines house a diverse microbiota that must compete for nutrients to 
survive, but the specific limiting nutrients that control pathogen colonization 
are not clearly defined. Clostridioides difficile colonization typically 
requires prior disruption of the microbiota, suggesting that outcompeting 
commensals for resources is critical to establishing C. difficile infection 
(CDI). The immune protein calprotectin (CP) is released into the gut lumen 
during CDI to chelate zinc (Zn) and other essential nutrient metals. Yet, the 
impact of Zn limitation on C. difficile colonization is unknown. To define C. 
difficile responses to Zn limitation, we performed RNA sequencing on C. 
difficile exposed to CP. In medium containing CP, C. difficile upregulated genes 
involved in metal homeostasis and amino acid metabolism. To identify 
CP-responsive genes important during infection, we measured the abundance of 
select C. difficile transcripts in a mouse CDI model relative to expression in 
vitro Gene transcripts involved in selenium (Se)-dependent proline fermentation 
increased during infection and in response to CP. Increased proline fermentation 
gene transcription was dependent on CP Zn binding and proline availability, yet 
proline fermentation was only enhanced when Se was supplemented. CP-deficient 
mice could not restrain C. difficile proline fermentation-dependent growth, 
suggesting that CP-mediated Zn sequestration along with limited Se restricts C. 
difficile proline fermentation. Overall, these results highlight how C. 
difficile colonization depends on the availability of multiple nutrients whose 
abundances are dynamically influenced by the host response.IMPORTANCE 
Clostridioides difficile infection (CDI) is the leading cause of postantibiotic 
nosocomial infection. Antibiotic therapy can be successful, yet up to one-third 
of individuals suffer from recurrent infections. Understanding the mechanisms 
controlling C. difficile colonization is paramount in designing novel treatments 
for primary and recurrent CDI. Here, we found that limiting nutrients control C. 
difficile metabolism during CDI and influence overall pathogen fitness. 
Specifically, the immune protein CP limits Zn availability and increases 
transcription of C. difficile genes necessary for proline fermentation. 
Paradoxically, this leads to reduced C. difficile proline fermentation. This 
reduced fermentation is due to limited availability of another nutrient required 
for proline fermentation, Se. Therefore, CP-mediated Zn limitation combined with 
low Se levels overall reduce C. difficile fitness in the intestines. These 
results emphasize the complexities of how nutrient availability influences C. 
difficile colonization and provide insight into critical metabolic processes 
that drive the pathogen's growth.
