BACKGROUND & AIMS: Trehalose is a disaccharide that might be used in the 
treatment of cardiometabolic diseases. However, trehalose consumption promotes 
the expansion of Clostridioides difficile ribotypes that metabolize trehalose 
via trehalose-6-phosphate hydrolase. Furthermore, brush border and renal 
trehalases can reduce the efficacy of trehalose by cleaving it into 
monosaccharides. We investigated whether a trehalase-resistant analogue of 
trehalose (lactotrehalose) has the same metabolic effects of trehalose without 
expanding C difficile.
METHODS: We performed studies with HEK293 and Caco2 cells, primary hepatocytes 
from mice, and human intestinal organoids. Glucose transporters were 
overexpressed in HEK293 cells, and glucose tra2nsport was quantified. Primary 
hepatocytes were cultured with or without trehalose or lactotrehalose, and gene 
expression patterns were analyzed. C57B6/J mice were given oral antibiotics and 
trehalose or lactotrehalose in drinking water, or only water (control), followed 
by gavage with the virulent C difficile ribotype 027 (CD027); fecal samples were 
analyzed for toxins A (ToxA) or B (ToxB) by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. 
Other mice were given trehalose or lactotrehalose in drinking water for 2 days 
before placement on a chow or 60% fructose diet for 10 days. Liver tissues were 
collected and analyzed by histologic, serum biochemical, RNA sequencing, 
autophagic flux, and thermogenesis analyses. We quantified portal trehalose and 
lactotrehalose bioavailability by gas chromatography mass spectrometry. Fecal 
microbiomes were analyzed by 16S ribosomal RNA sequencing and principal 
component analyses.
RESULTS: Lactotrehalose and trehalose each blocked glucose transport in HEK293 
cells and induced a gene expression pattern associated with fasting in primary 
hepatocytes. Compared with mice on the chow diet, mice on the high-fructose diet 
had increased circulating cholesterol, higher ratios of liver weight-to-body 
weight, hepatic lipid accumulation (steatosis), and liver gene expression 
patterns of carbohydrate-responsive de novo lipogenesis. Mice given 
lactotrehalose while on the high-fructose diet did not develop any of these 
features and had increased whole-body caloric expenditure compared with mice 
given trehalose or water and fed a high-fructose diet. Livers from mice given 
lactotrehalose had increased transcription of genes that regulate mitochondrial 
energy metabolism compared with liver from mice given trehalose or controls. 
Lactotrehalose was bioavailable in venous and portal circulation and fecal 
samples. Lactotrehalose reduced fecal markers of microbial branched-chain amino 
acid biosynthesis and increased expression of microbial genes that regulate 
insulin signaling. In mice given antibiotics followed by CD027, neither 
lactotrehalose nor trehalose increased levels of the bacteria or its toxin in 
stool-in fact, trehalose reduced the abundance of CD027 in stool. Lactotrehalose 
and trehalose reduced markers of inflammation in rectal tissue after CD027 
infection.
CONCLUSIONS: Lactotrehalose is a trehalase-resistant analogue that increases 
metabolic parameters, compared with trehalose, without increasing the abundance 
or virulence of C difficile strain CD027. Trehalase-resistant trehalose 
analogues might be developed as next-generation fasting-mimetics for the 
treatment of diabetes and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease.
