Antibiotics, while lifesaving, damage the gut microbiome and can precipitate 
proliferation of pathobionts. A strategy to preserve gut microbiome integrity is 
to eliminate biologically active antimicrobials excreted into the 
gastrointestinal tract (GI) without negatively affecting antibiotic therapeutic 
efficacy. Clinical proof of concept was achieved with SYN-004 (ribaxamase), a 
beta-lactamase enzyme formulated for oral delivery with intravenous penicillins 
and cephalosporins. Ribaxamase inactivated intestinal ceftriaxone, protected the 
gut microbiome, and significantly reduced the incidence of Clostridioides 
difficile disease. For use with oral beta-lactam antibiotics, a delayed release 
formulation of ribaxamase, SYN-007, was engineered for dissolution in the lower 
small intestine distal to the site of oral antibiotic absorption. In dogs that 
received oral amoxicillin, SYN-007 reduced microbiome disruption without 
interfering with amoxicillin systemic absorption. Here, a study to determine the 
lowest effective dose of SYN-007 was performed. Dogs received amoxicillin (40 
mg/kg, PO, TID) +/- SYN-007 (PO, TID) at three doses, 10 mg, 3 mg, or 1 mg for 
five days. Serum amoxicillin levels, measured after the first and last 
antibiotic doses, were not significantly different +/-SYN-007 at all dose levels 
indicating that SYN-007 did not interfere with amoxicillin systemic absorption. 
Microbiome analyses demonstrated that amoxicillin significantly reduced bacteria 
richness and microbiome diversity resulting in altered microbiome composition. 
However, with all doses of SYN-007, microbiome richness and diversity were not 
significantly different from pretreatment and changes in microbiome composition 
were attenuated. These data demonstrate that effective SYN-007 doses can be 
reduced at least 10-fold while maintaining gut microbiome preservation. The 
potential to employ low SYN-007 doses to protect the gut microbiota has 
important implications for enhancing therapeutic outcomes for patients receiving 
oral beta-lactam antibiotics while simultaneously reducing cost per dose and 
ultimately, healthcare expenses.
