Clostridioides difficile (formerly Clostridium difficile; C difficile), the 
leading cause of nosocomial antibiotic-associated colitis and diarrhea in the 
industrialized world, triggers colonic disease through the release two toxins, 
toxin A (TcdA) and toxin B (TcdB), glucosyltransferases that modulate monomeric 
G-protein function and alter cytoskeletal function. The initial degree of the 
host immune response to C difficile and its pathogenic toxins is a common 
indicator of disease severity and infection recurrence. Thus, targeting the 
intestinal inflammatory response during infection could significantly decrease 
disease morbidity and mortality. In the current study, we sought to interrogate 
the influence of the pregnane X receptor (PXR), a modulator of xenobiotic and 
detoxification responses, which can sense and respond to microbial metabolites 
and modulates inflammatory activity, during exposure to TcdA and TcdB. Following 
intrarectal exposure to TcdA/B, PXR-deficient mice (Nr1i2-/- ) exhibited reduced 
survival, an effect that was associated with increased levels of innate immune 
cell influx. This exacerbated response was associated with a twofold increase in 
the expression of Tlr4. Furthermore, while broad-spectrum antibiotic treatment 
(to deplete the intestinal microbiota) did not alter the responses in Nr1i2-/- 
mice, blocking TLR4 signaling significantly reduced TcdA/B-induced disease 
severity and immune responses in these mice. Lastly, to assess the therapeutic 
potential of targeting the PXR, we activated the PXR with pregnenolone 
16α-carbonitrile (PCN) in wild-type mice, which greatly reduced the severity of 
TcdA/B-induced damage and intestinal inflammation. Taken together, these data 
suggest that the PXR plays a role in the host's response to TcdA/B and may 
provide a novel target to dampen the inflammatory tissue damage in C difficile 
infections.

© 2019 University of Calgary. The FASEB Journal published by Wiley Periodicals, 
Inc. on behalf of Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology.
