The carriage of two important pathogens of pigs, that is enterotoxigenic 
Escherichia coli (ETEC) and Clostridioides difficile, was investigated in 104 
cloacal samples from wild griffon vultures (Gyps fulvus) fed on pig carcasses at 
supplementary feeding stations (SFS), along with their level of antimicrobial 
resistance (AMR). E. coli was isolated from 90 (86.5%) samples, but no ETEC was 
detected, likely because ETEC fimbriae confer the species specificity of the 
pathogen. Resistance to at least one antimicrobial agent was detected in 89.9% 
of E. coli isolates, with AMR levels being extremely high (>70%) for 
tetracycline and streptomycin and very high (>50%) for ampicillin and 
sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim. Resistance to other critically important 
antimicrobials such as colistin and extended-spectrum cephalosporins was 2.2% 
and 1.1%, respectively, and was encoded by the mcr-1 and blaSHV-12 genes. 
Multidrug resistance was displayed by 80% of the resistant E. coli, and 
blaSHV-12 gene shared plasmid with other AMR genes. In general, resistance 
patterns in E. coli from vultures mirrored those found in pigs. Clostridioides 
difficile was detected in three samples (2.9%); two of them belonged to PCR 
ribotype 078 and one to PCR ribotype 126, both commonly found in pigs. All 
C. difficile isolates were characterized by a moderate-to-high level of 
resistance to fluoroquinolones and macrolides but susceptible to metronidazole 
or vancomycin, similar to what is usually found in C. difficile isolates from 
pigs. Thus, vultures may contribute somewhat to the environmental dissemination 
of some pig pathogens through their acquisition from pig carcasses and, more 
importantly, of AMR for antibiotics of critical importance for humans. However, 
the role of vultures would likely be much lesser than that of disposing pig 
carcasses at the SFS. The monitoring of AMR, and particularly of 
colistin-resistant and ESBL-producing E. coli, should be considered in pig farms 
used as sources of carcasses for SFS.
