Dietary fiber provides a variety of microbiota-mediated benefits ranging from 
anti-inflammatory metabolites to pathogen colonization resistance. A healthy gut 
microbiota protects against Clostridioides difficile colonization. Manipulation 
of these microbes through diet may increase colonization resistance to improve 
clinical outcomes. The primary objective of this study was to identify how the 
dietary fiber xanthan gum affects the microbiota and C. difficile colonization. 
We added 5% xanthan gum to the diet of C57BL/6 mice and examined its effect on 
the microbiota through 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing and short-chain fatty 
acid analysis. Following either cefoperazone or an antibiotic cocktail 
administration, we challenged mice with C. difficile and measured colonization 
by monitoring the CFU. Xanthan gum administration is associated with increases 
in fiber-degrading taxa and short-chain fatty acid concentrations. However, by 
maintaining both the diversity and absolute abundance of the microbiota during 
antibiotic treatment, the protective effects of xanthan gum administration on 
the microbiota were more prominent than the enrichment of these fiber-degrading 
taxa. As a result, mice that were on the xanthan gum diet experienced limited to 
no C. difficile colonization. Xanthan gum administration alters mouse 
susceptibility to C. difficile colonization by maintaining the microbiota during 
antibiotic treatment. While antibiotic-xanthan gum interactions are not well 
understood, xanthan gum has previously been used to bind drugs and alter their 
pharmacokinetics. Thus, xanthan gum may alter the activity of the oral 
antibiotics used to make the microbiota susceptible. Future research should 
further characterize how this and other common dietary fibers interact with 
drugs.IMPORTANCE A healthy gut bacterial community benefits the host by breaking 
down dietary nutrients and protecting against pathogens. Clostridioides 
difficile capitalizes on the absence of this community to cause diarrhea and 
inflammation. Thus, a major clinical goal is to find ways to increase resistance 
to C. difficile colonization by either supplementing with bacteria that promote 
resistance or a diet to enrich for those already present in the gut. In this 
study, we describe an interaction between xanthan gum, a human dietary additive, 
and the microbiota resulting in an altered gut environment that is protective 
against C. difficile colonization.
