Beta-lactamases, enzymes produced by bacteria to degrade beta-lactam 
antibiotics, have been harnessed as therapeutics to protect the gut microbiome 
from damage caused by antibiotics. Proof-of-concept of this approach using 
SYN-004 (ribaxamase), a beta-lactamase formulated for oral delivery with 
intravenous (IV) penicillins and cephalosporins, was demonstrated with animal 
models and in humans. Ribaxamase degraded ceftriaxone in the gastrointestinal 
tract, protected the gut microbiome, significantly reduced the incidence of 
Clostridioides difficile disease and attenuated emergence of antibiotic 
resistant organisms. SYN-007 is a delayed release formulation of ribaxamase 
intended for use with oral beta-lactams. In dogs treated with oral amoxicillin, 
SYN-007 diminished antibiotic-mediated microbiome disruption and reduced the 
emergence of antibiotic resistance without altering amoxicillin systemic 
absorption. Here, SYN-007 function in the presence of clavulanate, a 
beta-lactamase inhibitor, was investigated. Dogs received amoxicillin (40 mg/kg, 
orally (PO), three times a day (TID)) or the combined antibiotic/beta-lactamase 
inhibitor, amoxicillin/clavulanate (40 mg/kg amoxicillin, 5.7 mg/kg clavulanate, 
PO, TID) +/- SYN-007 (10 mg, PO, TID) for five days. Serum amoxicillin levels 
were not significantly different +/- SYN-007 compared to amoxicillin alone or 
amoxicillin/clavulanate alone as controls for both first and last doses, 
indicating SYN-007 did not interfere with systemic absorption of the antibiotic. 
Whole genome shotgun metagenomics analyses of the fecal microbiomes demonstrated 
both amoxicillin and amoxicillin/clavulanate significantly reduced diversity and 
increased the frequency of antibiotic resistance genes. Microbiome damage 
appeared more severe with amoxicillin/clavulanate. In contrast, with SYN-007, 
microbiome diversity was not significantly altered, and frequency of antibiotic 
resistance genes did not increase. Importantly, SYN-007 functioned in the 
presence of clavulanate to protect the gut microbiome indicating that SYN-007 
activity was not inhibited by clavulanate in the dog gastrointestinal tract. 
SYN-007 has the potential to expand microbiome protection to 
beta-lactam/beta-lactamase inhibitor combinations delivered orally or 
systemically.
