BACKGROUND: Clostridioides difficile infections have become more frequently 
diagnosed and associated with greater disease severity, which has resulted in an 
increase burden on the healthcare system. These increases are attributed to the 
increased prevalence of hypervirulent strains encompassing select ribotypes. 
These epidemic ribotypes were characterized as hypervirulent due to higher in 
vitro spore and toxin production, as well as increased incidence, severity and 
mortality within patients. However, it is unclear whether epidemic ribotypes are 
truly more virulent than non-epidemic ribotypes in vivo. Furthermore, there is 
conflicting evidence about the ability of a strain's in vitro phenotype to be 
predictive of their in vivo virulence. The goals of the current studies were to 
determine if epidemic ribotypes are more virulent than other ribotypes in animal 
models, and whether the in vitro virulence phenotype of an isolate or ribotype 
predict in vivo virulence.
RESULTS: To determine if epidemic strains were truly more virulent than other 
non-epidemic strains, the in vivo virulence of 13 C. difficile isolates (7 
non-epidemic and 6 epidemic ribotype isolates) were determined in murine and 
hamster models of CDI. The isolates of epidemic ribotype of C. difficile were 
found to be more virulent in both the murine and hamster models than 
non-epidemic isolates. In particular, the group of epidemic ribotypes of C. 
difficile had lower LD50 values in hamsters. The increased severity of disease 
was associated with higher levels of Toxin A and Toxin B production found in 
fecal samples, but not numbers of organisms recovered. The isolates were further 
characterized for their in vitro virulence phenotypes, e.g. toxin production, 
growth rates, spore formation and adherence of spores to intestinal epithelial 
cell lines. Although there were higher levels of toxins produced and greater 
adherence for the group of epidemic ribotypes, the in vitro profiles of 
individual isolates were not always predictive of their in vivo virulence.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, the group of epidemic ribotypes of C. difficile were more 
virulent in vivo despite individual isolates having similar phenotypes to the 
non-epidemic isolates in vitro.
