Clostridioides difficile is an important nosocomial pathogen that causes 
approximately 500,000 cases of C. difficile infection (CDI) and 29,000 deaths 
annually in the United States. Antibiotic use is a major risk factor for CDI 
because broad-spectrum antimicrobials disrupt the indigenous gut microbiota, 
decreasing colonization resistance against C. difficile Vancomycin is the 
standard of care for the treatment of CDI, likely contributing to the high 
recurrence rates due to the continued disruption of the gut microbiota. Thus, 
there is an urgent need for the development of novel therapeutics that can 
prevent and treat CDI and precisely target the pathogen without disrupting the 
gut microbiota. Here, we show that the endogenous type I-B CRISPR-Cas system in 
C. difficile can be repurposed as an antimicrobial agent by the expression of a 
self-targeting CRISPR that redirects endogenous CRISPR-Cas3 activity against the 
bacterial chromosome. We demonstrate that a recombinant bacteriophage expressing 
bacterial genome-targeting CRISPR RNAs is significantly more effective than its 
wild-type parent bacteriophage at killing C. difficile both in vitro and in a 
mouse model of CDI. We also report that conversion of the phage from temperate 
to obligately lytic is feasible and contributes to the therapeutic suitability 
of intrinsic C. difficile phages, despite the specific challenges encountered in 
the disease phenotypes of phage-treated animals. Our findings suggest that 
phage-delivered programmable CRISPR therapeutics have the potential to leverage 
the specificity and apparent safety of phage therapies and improve their potency 
and reliability for eradicating specific bacterial species within complex 
communities, offering a novel mechanism to treat pathogenic and/or 
multidrug-resistant organisms.IMPORTANCE Clostridioides difficile is a bacterial 
pathogen responsible for significant morbidity and mortality across the globe. 
Current therapies based on broad-spectrum antibiotics have some clinical 
success, but approximately 30% of patients have relapses, presumably due to the 
continued perturbation to the gut microbiota. Here, we show that phages can be 
engineered with type I CRISPR-Cas systems and modified to reduce lysogeny and to 
enable the specific and efficient targeting and killing of C. difficile in vitro 
and in vivo. Additional genetic engineering to disrupt phage modulation of toxin 
expression by lysogeny or other mechanisms would be required to advance a 
CRISPR-enhanced phage antimicrobial for C. difficile toward clinical 
application. These findings provide evidence into how phage can be combined with 
CRISPR-based targeting to develop novel therapies and modulate microbiomes 
associated with health and disease.
