Frequent and excessive use of antibiotics primes patients to Clostridioides 
difficile infection (CDI), which leads to fatal pseudomembranous colitis, with 
limited treatment options. In earlier reports, we used a drug repurposing 
strategy and identified amoxapine (an antidepressant), doxapram (a breathing 
stimulant), and trifluoperazine (an antipsychotic), which provided significant 
protection to mice against lethal infections with several pathogens, including 
C. difficile However, the mechanisms of action of these drugs were not known. 
Here, we provide evidence that all three drugs offered protection against 
experimental CDI by reducing bacterial burden and toxin levels, although the 
drugs were neither bacteriostatic nor bactericidal in nature and had minimal 
impact on the composition of the microbiota. Drug-mediated protection was 
dependent on the presence of the microbiota, implicating its role in evoking 
host defenses that promoted protective immunity. By utilizing transcriptome 
sequencing (RNA-seq), we identified that each drug increased expression of 
several innate immune response-related genes, including those involved in the 
recruitment of neutrophils, the production of interleukin 33 (IL-33), and the 
IL-22 signaling pathway. The RNA-seq data on selected genes were confirmed by 
quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) and protein assays. Focusing on amoxapine, 
which had the best anti-CDI outcome, we demonstrated that neutralization of 
IL-33 or depletion of neutrophils resulted in loss of drug efficacy. Overall, 
our lead drugs promote disease alleviation and survival in the murine model 
through activation of IL-33 and by clearing the pathogen through host defense 
mechanisms that critically include an early influx of neutrophils.IMPORTANCE 
Clostridioides difficile is a spore-forming anaerobic bacterium and the leading 
cause of antibiotic-associated colitis. With few therapeutic options and high 
rates of disease recurrence, the need to develop new treatment options is 
urgent. Prior studies utilizing a repurposing approach identified three 
nonantibiotic Food and Drug Administration-approved drugs, amoxapine, doxapram, 
and trifluoperazine, with efficacy against a broad range of human pathogens; 
however, the protective mechanisms remained unknown. Here, we identified 
mechanisms leading to drug efficacy in a murine model of lethal C. difficile 
infection (CDI), advancing our understanding of the role of these drugs in 
infectious disease pathogenesis that center on host immune responses to C. 
difficile Overall, these studies highlight the crucial involvement of innate 
immune responses, as well as the importance of immunomodulation as a potential 
therapeutic option to combat CDI.
