OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect of vancomycin and fidaxomicin on the 
diversity of intestinal microbiota in a mouse model of Clostridioides difficile 
infection.
METHODS: Mice were divided into 11 models (4 mice per model): 6 uninoculated 
models and 5 models inoculated with C. difficile BI/NAP1/027. Inoculated models 
were prepared using intraperitoneal clindamycin followed by inoculation with 
C. difficile BI/NAP1/027. Uninoculated and C. difficile-inoculated mice received 
2 or 7 days' vancomycin or fidaxomicin. Clostridium butyricum MIYAIRI 588 
probiotic and lactoferrin prebiotic were administered for 10 days to 
uninoculated mice. Intestinal microbiome composition was investigated by 
sequence analyses of bacterial 16S rRNA genes from faeces, and microbiota 
diversity estimated.
RESULTS: In uninoculated, untreated ('normal') mice, Clostridia (57.8%) and 
Bacteroidia (32.4%) accounted for the largest proportions of gut microbiota. The 
proportion of Clostridia was numerically reduced in C. difficile-inoculated 
versus normal mice. Administration of vancomycin to C. difficile-inoculated mice 
reduced the proportions of Bacteroidia and Clostridia, and increased that of 
Proteobacteria. Administration of fidaxomicin to C. difficile-inoculated mice 
reduced the proportion of Clostridia to a lesser extent, but increased that of 
Bacteroidia. Microbiota diversity was lower in C. difficile-inoculated versus 
normal mice (164.5 versus 349.1 operational taxonomic units (OTUs), 
respectively); treatment of C. difficile-inoculated mice with 7 days' vancomycin 
reduced diversity to a greater extent than did 7 days' fidaxomicin treatment 
(26.2 versus 134.2 OTUs, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Both C. difficile inoculation and treatment with vancomycin or 
fidaxomicin reduced microbiota diversity; however, dysbiosis associated with 
fidaxomicin was milder than with vancomycin.

Copyright © 2020 Japanese Society of Chemotherapy and The Japanese Association 
for Infectious Diseases. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
