Clostridioides difficile is a spore-forming bacterium that causes severe colitis 
and is a major public health threat. During infection, C. difficile toxin 
production results in damage to the epithelium and a hyperinflammatory response. 
The immune response to CDI leads to robust neutrophil infiltration at the sight 
of infection and the deployment of numerous antimicrobials. One of the most 
abundant host immune factors associated with CDI is calprotectin, a 
metal-chelating protein with potent antimicrobial activity. Calprotectin is 
essential to the innate immune response to C. difficile and increasing levels of 
calprotectin correlate with disease severity in both adults and children with 
CDI. The fact that C. difficile persists in the presence of high levels of 
calprotectin suggests that this organism may deploy strategies to compete with 
this potent antimicrobial factor for essential nutrient metals during infection. 
In this report, we demonstrate that a putative zinc (Zn) transporter, ZupT, is 
employed by C. difficile to survive calprotectin-mediated metal limitation. ZupT 
is highly expressed in the presence of calprotectin and is required to protect 
C. difficile against calprotectin-dependent growth inhibition. When competing 
against wild-type C. difficile, zupT mutants show a defect in colonization and 
persistence in a murine model of infection. Together these data demonstrate that 
C. difficile utilizes a metal import system to combat nutritional immunity 
during CDI and suggest that strategies targeting nutrient acquisition in C. 
difficile may have therapeutic potential.IMPORTANCE During infection, pathogenic 
organisms must acquire essential transition metals from the host environment. 
Through the process of nutritional immunity, the host employs numerous 
strategies to restrict these key nutrients from invading pathogens. In this 
study, we describe a mechanism by which the important human pathogen 
Clostridioides difficile resists transition-metal limitation by the host. We 
report that C. difficile utilizes a zinc transporter, ZupT, to compete with the 
host protein calprotectin for nutrient zinc. Inactivation of this transporter in 
C. difficile renders this important pathogen sensitive to host-mediated metal 
restriction and confers a fitness disadvantage during infection. Our study 
demonstrates that targeting nutrient metal transport proteins in C. difficile is 
a potential avenue for therapeutic development.
