Mucosal associated invariant T-cells (MAIT cells) are activated following 
recognition of bacterial antigens (riboflavin intermediates) presented on major 
histocompatibility complex class I-related molecule (MR1). Our previous study 
showed that MR1-/- knock-out (KO) mice (lacking MAIT cells) harbor a unique 
microbiota that is resistant to antibiotic disruption and Clostridioides 
difficile colonization. While we have characterized the microbiota of this mouse 
strain, changes in global metabolic activity in these KO mice have not been 
assessed. Here, LC/MS-based untargeted metabolomics was applied to investigate 
the differences in the metabolome, specifically in the bile acid (BA) profile of 
wild-type (WT) and MR1-/- KO mice, as well as how antibiotics change these 
profiles. BA changes were evaluated in the intestinal content, cecum content, 
and stool samples from MR1-/- mice and WT mice treated with cefoperazone (Cef). 
Fecal pellets were collected daily and both intestinal and cecal contents were 
harvested at predetermined endpoints on day 0 (D0), day 1 (D1), day 3 (D3), and 
day 5 (D5). KO mice exhibited no changes in 6-hydroxymethyl-8-D-ribityllumazine 
(rRL-6-CH2OH; an MR1-restricted riboflavin derivative) in the stool samples at 
either time point vs. D0, while WT mice showed significant decreases in 
rRL-6-CH2OH in the stool samples on all treatment days vs. D0. Metabolomics 
analysis from cecal and stool samples showed that KO mice had more total BA 
intensity (KO/WT = ~1.7 and ~3.3 fold higher) than that from WT mice prior to 
Cef treatment, while the fold change difference (KO/WT = ~4.5 and ~4.4 fold) 
increased after five days of Cef treatment. Both KO and WT mice showed decreases 
in total BA intensity in response to Cef treatment, however, less dramatic 
decreases were present in KO vs. WT mice. Increases in taurocholic acid (TCA) 
intensity and decreases in deoxycholic acid (DCA) intensity in the stool samples 
from WT mice were associated with the depletion of certain gut bacteria, which 
was consistent with the previously reported microbiome data. Furthermore, the 
non-detected TCA and relatively higher DCA intensity in the KO mice might be 
related to Clostridioides difficile infection resistance, although this needs 
further investigation.
