A growing body of clinical and experimental data supports the view that the 
efficacy of probiotics is strain-specific and restricted to particular 
pathological conditions, which means that newly isolated probiotic strains need 
to be targeted to a specific disease. Following national and international 
guidelines, we used a conventional in vitro experimental approach to 
characterize a novel strain of Lactobacillus reuteri, LMG P-27481, for safety 
(sensitivity to antibiotics and genome analysis) and putative efficacy 
(resistance to gastro-intestinal transit, adhesiveness, induction of cytokines, 
and release of antimicrobial metabolites). In vitro assays, which were carried 
out to examine the probiotic's effect on diarrhea (lactose utilization, 
inhibition of pathogens such as bacteria and Rotavirus), showed that it was more 
efficacious with respect to well-known reference strains in antagonizing 
Clostridioides difficile (CD). Data confirming that the probiotic can 
effectively treat CD colitis was gained from in vivo trials involving mice 
conditioned with large spectrum antibiotics before they were subjected to CD 
challenge. Two out of the three antibiotic-treated groups received daily LMG 
P-27481 for different time durations in order to simulate a preventive approach 
(LMG P-27481 administered prior to CD challenge) or an antagonistic one (LMG 
P-27481 administered after CD challenge). Both approaches significantly reduced, 
with respect to the untreated controls, CD DNA concentrations in caecum and C. 
difficile toxin titers in the gut lumen. In addition, LMG P-27481 
supplementation significantly mitigated body weight loss and the extent of 
inflammatory infiltrate and tissue damage. The study results, which need to be 
confirmed by in vivo clinical trials, have demonstrated that the L. reuteri LMG 
P-27481 strain is a promising probiotic candidate for the treatment of CD 
infection.

Copyright © 2020 Sagheddu, Uggeri, Belogi, Remollino, Brun, Bernabè, Moretti, 
Porzionato, Morelli, Castagliuolo and Elli.
