BACKGROUND: Canine hemorrhagic gastroenteritis (also canine gastrointestinal 
hemorrhagic syndrome) is commonly associated with Clostridium perfringens, 
although in some cases the etiology remains unclear. This report describes a 
fatal acute hemorrhagic and necrotizing gastroenteropathy in a dog associated 
with Clostridium sordellii, a bacterial species never before identified as the 
etiological agent of hemorrhagic and necrotizing gastroenteropathy in dogs.
CASE PRESENTATION: A fully vaccinated, eight-year-old, female neutered Labrador 
presented with a history of vomiting without diarrhea. Clinical examination 
revealed pink mucous membranes, adequate hydration, normothermia, and 
normocardia. The dog was discovered deceased the following day. Post-mortem 
examination showed moderate amounts of dark red, non-clotted fluid within the 
stomach that extended into the jejunum. Discoloration was noted in the gastric 
mucosa, liver, lungs, and kidneys, with small petechial hemorrhages present in 
the endocardium over the right heart base and thymic remnants. Histological 
analysis demonstrated that the gastric fundic mucosa, the pyloric region, small 
intestine, and large intestine exhibited superficial coagulative necrosis and 
were lined with a layer of short Gram-positive rods. Anaerobic culture of the 
gastric content revealed C. sordellii as the dominant bacterial species and 
neither Salmonella spp., Campylobacter spp., C. perfringens, nor C. difficile 
were isolated. Unexpectedly, whole genome sequencing of the C. sordellii isolate 
showed that it lacked the main plasmid-encoded virulence factors typical of the 
species, indicating that the genetic determinants of pathogenicity of this 
strain must be chromosomally encoded. Further phylogenetic analysis revealed it 
to be genetically similar to C. sordellii isolates associated with gastroenteric 
disease in livestock, indicating that the infection may have been acquired from 
the environment.
CONCLUSIONS: This case demonstrates that C. sordellii can associate with a 
canine hemorrhagic and necrotizing gastroenteropathy in the absence of C. 
perfringens and illustrates the benefits of using bacterial whole genome 
sequencing to support pathological investigations in veterinary diagnostics. 
These data also update the molecular phylogeny of C. sordellii, indicating a 
possible pathogenic clade in the environment that is distinct from currently 
identified clades.
