Antimicrobial-resistant and novel pathogens continue to emerge, outpacing 
efforts to contain and treat them. Therefore, there is a crucial need for safe 
and effective therapies. Ultraviolet-A (UVA) phototherapy is FDA-approved for 
several dermatological diseases but not for internal applications. We 
investigated UVA effects on human cells in vitro, mouse colonic tissue in vivo, 
and UVA efficacy against bacteria, yeast, coxsackievirus group B and 
coronavirus-229E. Several pathogens and virally transfected human cells were 
exposed to a series of specific UVA exposure regimens. HeLa, alveolar and 
primary human tracheal epithelial cell viability was assessed after UVA 
exposure, and 8-Oxo-2'-deoxyguanosine was measured as an oxidative DNA damage 
marker. Furthermore, wild-type mice were exposed to intracolonic UVA as an in 
vivo model to assess safety of internal UVA exposure. Controlled UVA exposure 
yielded significant reductions in Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Klebsiella pneumoniae, 
Escherichia coli, Enterococcus faecalis, Clostridioides difficile, Streptococcus 
pyogenes, Staphylococcus epidermidis, Proteus mirabilis and Candida albicans. 
UVA-treated coxsackievirus-transfected HeLa cells exhibited significantly 
increased cell survival compared to controls. UVA-treated 
coronavirus-229E-transfected tracheal cells exhibited significant coronavirus 
spike protein reduction, increased mitochondrial antiviral-signaling protein and 
decreased coronavirus-229E-induced cell death. Specific controlled UVA exposure 
had no significant effect on growth or 8-Oxo-2'-deoxyguanosine levels in three 
types of human cells. Single or repeated in vivo intraluminal UVA exposure 
produced no discernible endoscopic, histologic or dysplastic changes in mice. 
These findings suggest that, under specific conditions, UVA reduces various 
pathogens including coronavirus-229E, and may provide a safe and effective 
treatment for infectious diseases of internal viscera. Clinical studies are 
warranted to further elucidate the safety and efficacy of UVA in humans.
