The gastrointestinal microbiome plays an important role in limiting 
susceptibility to infection with Clostridioides difficile To better understand 
the ecology of bacteria important for C. difficile colonization resistance, we 
developed an experimental platform to simplify complex communities of fecal 
bacteria through dilution and rapidly screen for their ability to resist C. 
difficile colonization after challenge, as measured by >100-fold reduction in 
levels of C. difficile in challenged communities. We screened 76 simplified 
communities diluted from cultures of six fecal donors and identified 24 
simplified communities that inhibited C. difficile colonization in vitro 
Sequencing revealed that simplified communities were composed of 19 to 67 
operational taxonomic units (OTUs) and could be partitioned into four distinct 
community types. One simplified community could be further simplified from 56 to 
28 OTUs through dilution and retain the ability to inhibit C. difficile We 
tested the efficacy of seven simplified communities in a humanized microbiota 
mouse model. We found that four communities were able to significantly reduce 
the severity of the initial C. difficile infection and limit susceptibility to 
disease relapse. Analysis of fecal microbiomes from treated mice demonstrated 
that simplified communities accelerated recovery of indigenous bacteria and led 
to stable engraftment of 19 to 22 OTUs from simplified communities. Overall, the 
insights gained through the identification and characterization of these 
simplified communities increase our understanding of the microbial dynamics of 
C. difficile infection and recovery.IMPORTANCE Clostridioides difficile is the 
leading cause of antibiotic-associated diarrhea and a significant health care 
burden. Fecal microbiota transplantation is highly effective at treating 
recurrent C. difficile disease; however, uncertainties about the undefined 
composition of fecal material and potential long-term unintended health 
consequences remain. These concerns have motivated studies to identify new 
communities of microbes with a simpler composition that will be effective at 
treating disease. This work describes a platform for rapidly identifying and 
screening new simplified communities for efficacy in treating C. difficile 
infection. Four new simplified communities of microbes with potential for 
development of new therapies to treat C. difficile disease are identified. While 
this platform was developed and validated to model infection with C. difficile, 
the underlying principles described in the paper could be easily modified to 
develop therapeutics to treat other gastrointestinal diseases.
