BACKGROUND & AIMS: Clostridioides difficile toxin A (TcdA) activates the innate 
immune response. TcdA co-purifies with DNA. Toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9) 
recognizes bacterial DNA to initiate inflammation. We investigated whether DNA 
bound to TcdA activates an inflammatory response in murine models of C difficile 
infection via activation of TLR9.
METHODS: We performed studies with human colonocytes and monocytes and 
macrophages from wild-type and TLR9 knockout mice incubated with TcdA or its 
antagonist (ODN TTAGGG) or transduced with vectors encoding TLR9 or 
small-interfering RNAs. Cytokine production was measured with enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay. We studied a transduction domain of TcdA (TcdA57-80), which 
was predicted by machine learning to have cell-penetrating activity and 
confirmed by synchrotron small-angle X-ray scattering. Intestines of CD1 mice, 
C57BL6J mice, and mice that express a form of TLR9 that is not activated by CpG 
DNA were injected with TcdA, TLR9 antagonist, or both. Enterotoxicity was 
estimated based on loop weight to length ratios. A TLR9 antagonist was tested in 
mice infected with C difficile. We incubated human colon explants with an 
antagonist of TLR9 and measured TcdA-induced production of cytokines.
RESULTS: The TcdA57-80 protein transduction domain had membrane remodeling 
activity that allowed TcdA to enter endosomes. TcdA-bound DNA entered human 
colonocytes. TLR9 was required for production of cytokines by cultured cells and 
in human colon explants incubated with TcdA. TLR9 was required in TcdA-induced 
mice intestinal secretions and in the survival of mice infected by C difficile. 
Even in a protease-rich environment, in which only fragments of TcdA exist, the 
TcdA57-80 domain organized DNA into a geometrically ordered structure that 
activated TLR9.
CONCLUSIONS: TcdA from C difficile can bind and organize bacterial DNA to 
activate TLR9. TcdA and TcdA fragments remodel membranes, which allows them to 
access endosomes and present bacterial DNA to and activate TLR9. Rather than 
inactivating the ability of DNA to bind TLR9, TcdA appears to chaperone and 
organize DNA into an inflammatory, spatially periodic structure.
