Clostridioides difficile toxin A (TcdA) has been shown to inhibit cellular Wnt 
signaling, the major driving force behind the proliferation of epithelial cells 
in colonic crypts, likely through the inhibition of β-catenin nuclear 
translocation. Herein, we aimed to advance the understanding of this mechanism 
by replicating the findings in vivo and by investigating the specific role of 
Rac1, a member of the Rho GTPase family, on the inhibition of the Wnt-induced 
β-catenin nuclear translocation triggered by TcdA. To investigate the effects of 
TcdA on the Wnt/β-catenin pathway in vivo, we injected the ileal loops of 
C57BL/6 mice with TcdA [phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) as the control] to 
induce C. difficile disease-like ileitis. After 4 h post-injection, we obtained 
ileum tissue samples to assess Wnt signaling activation and cell proliferation 
through Western blotting, immunohistochemistry, and qPCR. To assess the role of 
Rac1 on Wnt signaling inhibition by TcdA, we transfected rat intestinal 
epithelial cells (IEC-6) with either a constitutively active Rac1 plasmid 
(pcDNA3-EGFP-Rac1-Q61L) or an empty vector, which served as the control. We 
incubated these cells with Wnt3a-conditioned medium (Wnt3a-CM) to induce 
Wnt/β-catenin pathway activation, and then challenged the cells with TcdA. We 
assessed Wnt signaling activation in vitro with TOP/FOPflash luciferase assays, 
determined nuclear β-catenin translocation by immunofluorescence, measured 
cyclin D1 protein expression by Western blotting, and quantified cell 
proliferation by Ki67 immunostaining. In vivo, TcdA decreased β-catenin, cyclin 
D1, and cMYC expression and inhibited the translocation of β-catenin into the 
nucleus in the ileum epithelial cells. In addition, TcdA suppressed cell 
proliferation and increased Wnt3a expression, but did not alter Rac1 gene 
expression in the ileum tissue. In vitro, constitutively active Rac1 prevented 
Wnt signaling inhibition by enabling the β-catenin nuclear translocation that 
had been blocked by TcdA. Our results show that TcdA inhibits Wnt/β-catenin 
pathway in vivo and demonstrate that this inhibition is likely caused by a 
Rac1-mediated mechanism.

Copyright © 2020 Martins, Costa, Lima, Leitäo, Freire, Silva, Pacífico, Abreu 
and Brito.
