BACKGROUND: Prebiotic galacto-oligosaccharides (GOS) have an extensively 
demonstrated beneficial impact on intestinal health. In this study, we 
determined the impact of GOS diets on hallmarks of gut aging: microbiome 
dysbiosis, inflammation, and intestinal barrier defects ("leaky gut"). We also 
evaluated if short-term GOS feeding influenced how the aging gut responded to 
antibiotic challenges in a mouse model of Clostridioides difficile infection. 
Finally, we assessed if colonic organoids could reproduce the GOS 
responder-non-responder phenotypes observed in vivo.
RESULTS: Old animals had a distinct microbiome characterized by increased ratios 
of non-saccharolytic versus saccharolytic bacteria and, correspondingly, a lower 
abundance of β-galactosidases compared to young animals. GOS reduced the overall 
diversity, increased the abundance of specific saccharolytic bacteria (species 
of Bacteroides and Lactobacillus), increased the abundance of β-galactosidases 
in young and old animals, and increased the non-saccharolytic organisms; 
however, a robust, homogeneous bifidogenic effect was not observed. GOS reduced 
age-associated increased intestinal permeability and increased MUC2 expression 
and mucus thickness in old mice. Clyndamicin reduced the abundance 
Bifidobacterium while increasing Akkermansia, Clostridium, Coprococcus, 
Bacillus, Bacteroides, and Ruminococcus in old mice. The antibiotics were more 
impactful than GOS on modulating serum markers of inflammation. Higher serum 
levels of IL-17 and IL-6 were observed in control and GOS diets in the 
antibiotic groups, and within those groups, levels of IL-6 were higher in the 
GOS groups, regardless of age, and higher in the old compared to young animals 
in the control diet groups. RTqPCR revealed significantly increased gene 
expression of TNFα in distal colon tissue of old mice, which was decreased by 
the GOS diet. Colon transcriptomics analysis of mice fed GOS showed increased 
expression of genes involved in small-molecule metabolic processes and 
specifically the respirasome in old animals, which could indicate an increased 
oxidative metabolism and energetic efficiency. In young mice, GOS induced the 
expression of binding-related genes. The galectin gene Lgals1, a 
β-galactosyl-binding lectin that bridges molecules by their sugar moieties and 
is an important modulator of the immune response, and the PI3K-Akt and 
ECM-receptor interaction pathways were also induced in young mice. Stools from 
mice exhibiting variable bifidogenic response to GOS injected into colon 
organoids in the presence of prebiotics reproduced the response and non-response 
phenotypes observed in vivo suggesting that the composition and functionality of 
the microbiota are the main contributors to the phenotype.
CONCLUSIONS: Dietary GOS modulated homeostasis of the aging gut by promoting 
changes in microbiome composition and host gene expression, which was translated 
into decreased intestinal permeability and increased mucus production. Age was a 
determining factor on how prebiotics impacted the microbiome and expression of 
intestinal epithelial cells, especially apparent from the induction of 
galectin-1 in young but not old mice. Video abstract.
