Neutrophils are key first-responders in the innate immune response to C. 
difficile infection (CDI) and play a central role in disease pathogenesis. 
Studies have clearly shown that tissue neutrophil numbers need to be tightly 
regulated for optimal CDI outcomes: while excessive colonic neutrophilia is 
associated with severe CDI, neutrophil depletion also results in worse outcomes. 
However, the biological mechanisms that control CDI-induced neutrophilia remain 
poorly defined. C-X-C chemokine receptor 2 (CXCR2) is a chemotactic receptor 
that is critical in neutrophil mobilization from bone marrow to blood and tissue 
sites. We have previously reported that a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) 
in leptin receptor (LEPR), present in up to 50% of people, influenced 
CDI-induced neutrophil CXCR2 expression and tissue neutrophilia. Homozygosity 
for mutant LEPR (i.e. RR genotype) was associated with higher CXCR2 expression 
and more tissue neutrophils. Here, we investigated the biological mechanisms 
that regulate neutrophil CXCR2 expression after CDI, and the influence of host 
genetics on this process. Our data reveal that: a) CXCR2 plays a key role in 
CDI-induced neutrophil extravasation from blood to colonic tissue; b) plasma 
from C. difficile-infected mice upregulated CXCR2 on bone marrow neutrophils; c) 
plasma from C. difficile-infected RR mice induced a higher magnitude of CXCR2 
upregulation and had more IL-1β; and d) IL-1β neutralization reduced CXCR2 
expression on bone marrow and blood neutrophils and their subsequent accrual to 
colonic tissue. In sum, our data indicate that IL-1β is a key molecular mediator 
that communicates between gastro-intestinal tract (i.e. site of CDI) and bone 
marrow (i.e. primary neutrophil reservoir) and regulates the intensity of 
CDI-induced tissue neutrophilia by modulating CXCR2 expression. Further, our 
studies highlight the importance of host genetics in affecting these innate 
immune responses and provide novel insights into the mechanisms by which a 
common SNP influences CDI-induced neutrophilia.
