Campylobacter jejuni is an important diarrheal pathogen worldwide; the 
mechanisms by which it causes disease remain unclear. Because of its association 
with inflammatory diarrhea, we postulated that C. jejuni might produce a 
cytotoxin similar to that produced by Shigella sp., enterohemorrhagic 
Escherichia coli O157, or Clostridium difficile. Filtrates of 12 
polymyxin-treated isolates of C. jejuni were placed on HeLa cells (sensitive to 
Shiga toxin cytotoxicity) and Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells. Of 12 isolates 
of C. jejuni tested, 5 killed 50% of the cells at greater than or equal to 1:4 
dilutions of filtered suspensions of 10(9) bacteria per ml; killing was similar 
in HeLa and CHO cells (the CHO cells being insensitive to Shiga cytotoxin). One 
isolate produced a titer of 1:32 to 1:128. The relative potency in HeLa cells 
was comparable to that of E. coli strains that produce intermediate amounts of 
Shiga-like toxin. The other seven strains showed no cytotoxic effect, nor did 
the control diluents, polymyxin B, or supernatants of C. jejuni not treated with 
polymyxin B. Sonication also released active cytotoxin, but slightly less well 
than did polymyxin. The cytotoxic effect was dose dependent. Concentration of 
the C. jejuni in suspension by 10-fold before treatment with polymyxin B 
resulted in a 10-fold increase in the 50% cytotoxic dose. The cytotoxin effect 
was not neutralized by Shiga toxin immune serum against either Shiga-like toxin 
I or II or by anti-Clostridium difficile antiserum. The C jejuni cytotoxin was 
partially labile to trypsin (0.25%) and to heating to greater than or equal to 
60 degrees C. Cytotoxicity was retained in Scientific Products dialysis tubing 
D1615-1 (Mr cutoff, 12,000 to 14,000). Some isolates of C. jejuni release a 
substance lethal to HeLa or CHO cells in vitro that is distinct from Shiga-like 
or Clostridium difficile toxin. This cytotoxin may contribute to the colonic 
mucosal invasive process that characterizes C. jejuni enteritis.
