This study was undertaken to determine whether a binding site for Clostridium 
difficile enterotoxin (toxin A) exists in the brush border membranes (BBMs) of 
the hamster, an animal known to be extremely sensitive to the action of the 
toxin. Toxin A was the only antigen adsorbed by the BBMs from the culture 
filtrate of C. difficile. The finding that binding activity could not be 
destroyed by heat indicated that a carbohydrate moiety might be involved. We 
therefore examined erythrocytes from various animal species for binding activity 
since erythrocytes provide a variety of carbohydrate sequences on their cell 
surfaces. Only rabbit erythrocytes bound the toxin, and the cells agglutinated. 
A binding assay based on an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay method for 
quantifying C. difficile toxin A was used to compare binding of the toxin to 
hamster BBMs, rabbit erythrocytes, and BBMs from rats, which are less 
susceptible to the action of C. difficile toxin A than hamsters. Results of this 
comparison indicated the following order of toxin-binding frequency: rabbit 
erythrocytes greater than hamster BBMs greater than rat BBMs. Binding of toxin A 
to hamster BBMs at 37 degrees C was comparable to what has been observed with 
cholera toxin, but binding was enhanced at 4 degrees C. A similar binding 
phenomenon was observed with rabbit erythrocytes. Examination of the cell 
surfaces of hamster BBMs and rabbit erythrocytes with lectins and specific 
glycosidases revealed a high concentration of terminal alpha-linked galactose. 
Treatment of both membrane types with alpha-galactosidase destroyed the binding 
activity. The glycoprotein, calf thyroglobulin, also bound the toxin and 
inhibited toxin binding to cells. Toxin A did not bind to human erythrocytes 
from blood group A, B, or O donors. However, after fucosidase treatment of human 
erythrocytes, only blood group B erythrocytes, which possess the blood group B 
structure Gal alpha 1-3[Fuc alpha 1-2]Gal beta 1-4GlcNAc-R, bound the toxin. 
This indicated that toxin A was likely binding to Gal alpha 1-3Gal beta 
1-4GlcNAc, a carbohydrate sequence also found on calf thyroglobulin and rabbit 
erythrocytes. All of the results indicate that hamster BBMs contain a 
carbohydrate-binding site for toxin A that has at least a Gal alpha 1-3Gal beta 
1-4GlcNAc nonreducing terminal sequence.
