Understanding the dynamics of the establishment of C. difficile within the gut 
is vital to effective prevention, control and therapy of disease due to this 
nosocomial pathogen. Factors affecting the establishment of C. difficile in the 
gut were investigated including the role of bacterial metabolic products (BMPs), 
the composition of colonic flora, diet, and properties of the infecting strain. 
Concentrations of 9/12 bacterial metabolic products (BMPs), both volatile and 
non-volatile were significantly higher in mice which eliminated oral challenge 
with 10(8) spores of C. difficile (E mice) than in mice harbouring the organism 
(H mice). Growth of C. difficile in vitro was inhibited 10(4) fold at 
combinations of BMPs at concentrations found in stools of E mice but not in 
stools of H mice. The in situ production and concentrations of BMPs were 
increased by augmenting the amount of fermentable fibre in the diet. This 
resulted in elimination of C. difficile from 6/7 C. difficile colonized mice 
within 6 days of beginning a diet containing 20% fermentable fibre. Whereas mice 
fed diets containing 2% fermentable fibre or 20% non-fermentable fibre continued 
excreting the organism. Elimination of C. difficile was associated with 
increased concentrations of BMPs and changes in the numbers of organisms already 
present within the colonic flora. Properties of two microbial phenotypes (smooth 
(S), and rough (R)) of one strain of C. difficile were examined in vitro and the 
ID50s determined. The S phenotype survived, germinated and grew in media 
containing higher concentrations of BMPs, acquired iron when grown under iron 
restriction, utilized haem and bound Congo red more readily than the R 
phenotype. In mice fed the 2% fermentable fibre diet the ID50 for the S 
phenotype was 10(3) spores and 10(8) spores for the R phenotype, whereas for 
mice fed the 20% fermentable fibre diet it was > 10(6) spores for the S 
phenotype. The ability of this opportunistic pathogen to adapt to changing 
environmental conditions is an important factor in determining whether the 
organism will colonize and cause disease. Diets supplemented with fermentable 
fibre may be a valuable method of preventing and treating C. difficile related 
disease.
