Clostridium difficile (Cd) toxins appear to mediate the inflammatory response in 
pseudomembranous colitis and/or colitis associated with the use of antibiotics. 
In contrast to Cd Toxin A (TxA), Cd Toxin B (TxB) has been reported not to 
promote fluid secretion or morphological damage in rabbits and hamsters and also 
does not induce neutrophil chemotaxis in vitro. However, TxB is about 1000 times 
more potent than TxA in stimulating the release of tumour necrosis factor-alpha 
(TNF-alpha) by cultured monocytes. In the present study, we investigated the 
ability of TxB to promote neutrophil migration into peritoneal cavities and 
subcutaneous air-pouches of rats. We also examined the role of resident 
peritoneal cells in this process as well as the inflammatory mediators involved. 
TxB caused a significant and dose-dependent neutrophil influx with a maximal 
response at 0.1 microgram/cavity after 4 hr. Depleting the peritoneal resident 
cell population by washing the peritoneal cavity or increasing this population 
by pretreating the animals with thioglycollate blocked and amplified the 
TxB-induced neutrophil migration, respectively. Pretreating the animals with 
MK886 (a lipoxygenase inhibitor), NDGA (a dual cyclo- and lipoxygenase 
inhibitor) or the glucocorticoid, dexamethasone, but not with indomethacin (a 
cyclo-oxygenase inhibitor), or BN52021 (a platelet-activating factor 
antagonist), inhibited the neutrophil migration evoked by TxB. Pretreatment with 
dexamethasone or the administration of anti-TNF-alpha serum into the air-pouches 
also significantly reduced the TxB-induced neutrophil migration. Supernatants 
from TxB-stimulated macrophages induced neutrophil migration when injected into 
the rat peritoneal cavity. This effect was attenuated by the addition of either 
MK886 or dexamethasone to the macrophage monolayer and by preincubating the 
supernatants with anti-TNF-alpha serum. TxB also stimulated the release of 
TNF-alpha by macrophages. Overall, these results suggest that TxB induces an 
intense neutrophil migration which is mediated by macrophage-derived TNF-alpha 
and lipoxygenase products.
