BACKGROUND & AIMS: Clostridium difficile is the leading cause of nosocomial 
infectious diarrhea. Antibiotic resistance and increased virulence of strains 
have increased the number of C difficile-related deaths worldwide. The innate 
host response mechanisms to C difficile are not resolved; we propose that 
hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF-1) has an innate, protective role in C difficile 
colitis. We studied the impact of C difficile toxins on the regulation of HIF-1 
and evaluated the role of HIF-1alpha in C difficile-mediated 
injury/inflammation.
METHODS: We assessed HIF-1alpha mRNA and protein levels and DNA binding in human 
mucosal biopsy samples and Caco-2 cells following exposure to C difficile 
toxins. We used the mouse ileal loop model of C difficile toxin-induced 
intestinal injury. Mice with targeted deletion of HIF-1alpha in the intestinal 
epithelium were used to assess the effects of HIF-1alpha signaling in response 
to C difficile toxin.
RESULTS: Mucosal biopsy specimens and Caco-2 cells exposed to C difficile toxin 
had a significant increase in HIF-1alpha transcription and protein levels. 
Toxin-induced DNA binding was also observed in Caco-2 cells. Toxin-induced 
HIF-1alpha accumulation was attenuated by nitric oxide synthase inhibitors. In 
vivo deletion of intestinal epithelial HIF-1alpha resulted in more severe, 
toxin-induced intestinal injury and inflammation. In contrast, stabilization of 
HIF-1alpha with dimethyloxallyl glycine attenuated toxin-induced injury and 
inflammation. This was associated with induction of HIF-1-regulated protective 
factors (such as vascular endothelial growth factor-alpha, CD73, and intestinal 
trefoil factor) and down-regulation of proinflammatory molecules such as tumor 
necrosis factor and Cxcl1.
CONCLUSIONS: HIF-1alpha protects the intestinal mucosa from C difficile toxins. 
The innate protective actions of HIF-1alpha in response to C difficile toxins be 
developed as therapeutics for C difficile-associated disease.
