Clostridium difficile is the main agent responsible for hospital acquired 
antibiotic associated diarrhoea. In recent years, epidemic strains have emerged 
causing more severe infections. Whilst C. difficile has two major virulence 
factors, toxins TcdA and TcdB, it is generally accepted that other virulence 
components of the bacterium contribute to disease. Previously, it has been 
suggested that flagella expression from pathogenic bacteria might be implicated 
in virulence. In a recent study, we observed an increased mortality in a 
gnotobiotic mouse model when animals were colonized with an isogenic fliC mutant 
constructed in the PCR-ribotype 027 (B1/NAP1) strain R20291, while animals 
survived when colonized by the parental strain or after colonization by other 
high-toxin-producing C. difficile strains. To understand the reasons for this 
increased virulence, we compared the global gene expression profiles between the 
fliC-R20291 mutant and its parental strain using an in vitro and in vivo 
transcriptomic approach. The latter made use of the gnotobiotic mouse model. 
Interestingly, in the fliC mutant, we observed considerable up-regulation of 
genes involved in mobility, membrane transport systems (PTS, ABC transporters), 
carbon metabolism, known virulence factors and sporulation. A smaller but 
significant up-regulation of genes involved in cell growth, fermentation, 
metabolism, stress and antibiotic resistance was also apparent. All of these 
genes may be associated with the increased virulence of the fliC-R20921 mutant. 
We confirmed that the fliC mutation is solely responsible for the observed 
changes in gene expression in the mutant strain since expression profiles were 
restored to that of the wild-type strain in the fliC-complemented strain. Thus, 
the absence of FliC is directly or indirectly involved in the high mortality 
observed in the fliC mutant infected animals. Therefore, we provide the first 
evidence that when the major structural component of the flagellum is 
neutralized, deregulation of gene expression can occur during infection.
