OBJECTIVES: Metronidazole, a mainstay treatment for Clostridium difficile 
infection (CDI), is often ineffective for severe CDI. Whilst this is thought to 
arise from suboptimal levels of metronidazole in the colon due to rapid 
absorption, empirical validation is lacking. In contrast, reutericyclin, an 
antibacterial tetramic acid from Lactobacillus reuteri, concentrates in the 
gastrointestinal tract. In this study, we modified metronidazole with 
reutericyclin's tetramic acid motif to obtain non-absorbed compounds, enabling 
assessment of the impact of pharmacokinetics on treatment outcomes.
METHODS: A series of metronidazole-bearing tetramic acid substituents were 
synthesized and evaluated in terms of anti-C. difficile activities, gastric 
permeability, in vivo pharmacokinetics, efficacy in the hamster model of CDI and 
mode of action.
RESULTS: Most compounds were absorbed less than metronidazole in cell-based 
Caco-2 permeability assays. In hamsters, lead compounds compartmentalized in the 
colon rather than the bloodstream with negligible levels detected in the blood, 
in direct contrast with metronidazole, which was rapidly absorbed into the blood 
and was undetectable in caecum. Accordingly, four leads were more efficacious 
(P < 0.05) than metronidazole in C. difficile-infected animals. Improved 
efficacy was not due to an alternative mode of action, as the leads retained the 
mode of action of metronidazole.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides the clearest empirical evidence that the high 
absorption of metronidazole lowers treatment outcomes for CDI and suggests a 
role for the tetramic acid motif for colon-specific drug delivery. This approach 
also has the potential to lower systemic toxicity and drug interactions of 
nitroheterocyclic drugs for treating gastrointestine-specific diseases.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the British 
Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy. All rights reserved. For Permissions, 
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.
