Clostridium difficile is the causative agent of the most frequently reported 
nosocomial diarrhea worldwide. The high incidence of recurrent infection is the 
main clinical challenge of C. difficile infections (CDI). Formation of C. 
difficile spores of the epidemic strain R20291 has been shown to be essential 
for recurrent infection and transmission of the disease in a mouse model. 
However, the underlying mechanisms of how these spores persist in the colonic 
environment remains unclear. In this work, we characterized the adherence 
properties of epidemic R20291 spores to components of the intestinal mucosa, and 
we assessed the role of the exosporium integrity in the adherence properties by 
using cdeC mutant spores with a defective exosporium layer. Our results showed 
that spores and vegetative cells of the epidemic R20291 strain adhered at high 
levels to monolayers of Caco-2 cells and mucin. Transmission electron 
micrographs of Caco-2 cells demonstrated that the hair-like projections on the 
surface of R20291 spores are in close proximity with the plasma membrane and 
microvilli of undifferentiated and differentiated monolayers of Caco-2 cells. 
Competitive-binding assay in differentiated Caco-2 cells suggests that 
spore-adherence is mediated by specific binding sites. By using spores of a cdeC 
mutant we demonstrated that the integrity of the exosporium layer determines the 
affinity of adherence of C. difficile spores to Caco-2 cells and mucin. Binding 
of fibronectin and vitronectin to the spore surface was concentration-dependent, 
and depending on the concentration, spore-adherence to Caco-2 cells was 
enhanced. In the presence of an aberrantly-assembled exosporium (cdeC spores), 
binding of fibronectin, but not vitronectin, was increased. Notably, independent 
of the exosporium integrity, only a fraction of the spores had fibronectin and 
vitronectin molecules binding to their surface. Collectively, these results 
demonstrate that the integrity of the exosporium layer of strain R20291 
contributes to selective spore adherence to components of the intestinal mucosa.
