Clostridium difficile is currently the leading cause of nosocomial infection. 
Antibiotics remain the first-line therapy for C. difficile-associated diseases 
(CDAD), despite the risks of resistance promotion and further gut microbiota 
perturbation. Notably, the abundance of Bacteroides fragilis was reported to be 
significantly decreased in CDAD patients. This study aimed to clarify the 
prophylactic effects of B. fragilis strain ZY-312 in a mouse model of C. 
difficile infection (CDI). The CDI mouse model was successfully created using C. 
difficile strain VPI 10463 spores, as confirmed by lethal diarrhea (12.5% 
survival rate), serious gut barrier disruption, and microbiota disruption. CDI 
model mice prophylactically treated with B. fragilis exhibited significantly 
higher survival rates (100% in low dosage group, 87.5% in high dosage group) and 
improved clinical manifestations. Histopathological analysis of colon and cecum 
tissue samples revealed an intact gut barrier with strong ZO-1 and Muc-2 
expression. The bacterial diversity and relative abundance of gut microbiota 
were significantly improved. Interestingly, the relative abundance of 
Akkermansia muciniphila was positively correlated with B. fragilis treatment. In 
vitro experiments showed that B. fragilis inhibited C. difficile adherence, and 
attenuated the decrease in CDI-induced transepithelial electrical resistance, 
ZO-1 and MUC-2 loss, and apoptosis, suggesting that B. fragilis protected 
against CDI possibly by resisting pathogen colonization and improving gut 
barrier integrity and functions. In summary, B. fragilis exerted protective 
effects on a CDI mouse model by modulating gut microbiota and alleviating 
barrier destruction, thereby relieving epithelial stress and pathogenic colitis 
triggered by C. difficile. This study provides an alternative preventative 
measure for CDI and lays the foundations for further investigations of the 
relationships among opportunistic pathogens, commensal microbiota, and the gut 
barrier.
