Between October 2016 and June 2017, a C57BL/6J mouse colony that was undergoing 
a pre- and perinatal methyl donor supplementation diet intervention to study the 
impact of parental nutrition on offspring susceptibility to disease was found to 
suffer from an epizootic of unexpected deaths. Necropsy revealed the presence of 
severe colitis, and further investigation linked these outbreak deaths to a 
Clostridium difficile strain of ribotype 027 that we term 16N203. C. difficile 
infection (CDI) is associated with antibiotic use in humans. Current murine 
models of CDI rely on antibiotic pretreatment to establish clinical phenotypes. 
In this report, the C. difficile outbreak occurs in F1 mice linked to 
alterations in the parental diet. The diagnosis of CDI in the affected mice was 
confirmed by cecal/colonic histopathology, the presence of C. difficile bacteria 
in fecal/colonic culture, and detection of C. difficile toxins. F1 mice from 
parents fed the methyl supplementation diet also had significantly reduced 
survival (P < 0.0001) compared with F1 mice from parents fed the control diet. 
When we tested the 16N203 outbreak strain in an established mouse model of 
antibiotic-induced CDI, we confirmed that this strain is pathogenic. Our 
serendipitous observations from this spontaneous outbreak of C. difficile in 
association with a pre- and perinatal methyl donor diet suggest the important 
role that diet may play in host defense and CDI risk factors.IMPORTANCE 
Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) has become the leading cause of infectious 
diarrhea in hospitals worldwide, owing its preeminence to the emergence of 
hyperendemic strains, such as ribotype 027 (RT027). A major CDI risk factor is 
antibiotic exposure, which alters gut microbiota, resulting in the loss of 
colonization resistance. Current murine models of CDI also depend on 
pretreatment of animals with antibiotics to establish disease. The outbreak that 
we report here is unique in that the CDI occurred in mice with no antibiotic 
exposure and is associated with a pre- and perinatal methyl supplementation 
donor diet intervention study. Our investigation subsequently reveals that the 
outbreak strain that we term 16N203 is an RT027 strain, and this isolated strain 
is also pathogenic in an established murine model of CDI (with antibiotics). Our 
report of this spontaneous outbreak offers additional insight into the 
importance of environmental factors, such as diet, and CDI susceptibility.
