Changes in the intestinal microbiota have been associated with the development 
of immune-mediated diseases in humans. Additionally, the introduction of defined 
bacterial species into the mouse intestinal microbiota has been shown to impact 
on the adaptive immune response. However, how much impact the intestinal 
microbiota composition actually has on regulating adaptive immunity remains 
poorly understood. Therefore, we studied aspects of the adaptive immunity in 
healthy adults possessing distinct intestinal microbiota profiles. The 
intestinal microbiota composition was determined via Illumina sequencing of 
bacterial 16S rRNA genes extracted from the feces of 35 individuals. Blood 
B-cell and T-cell subsets from the same individuals were studied using flow 
cytometry. Finally, the binding of fecal and plasma Immunoglobulin A (IgA) to 
intestinal bacteria (associated with health and disease) Bacteroides fragilis, 
Prevotella copri, Bifidobacterium longum, Clostridium difficile, and Escherichia 
coli was analyzed using ELISA. Unsupervised clustering of microbiota composition 
revealed the presence of three clusters within the cohort. Cluster 1 and 2 were 
similar to previously-described enterotypes with a predominance of Bacteroides 
in Cluster 1 and Prevotella in Cluster 2. The bacterial diversity (Shannon 
index) and bacterial richness of Cluster 3 was significantly higher than 
observed in Clusters 1 and 2, with the Ruminococacceae tending to predominate. 
Within circulating B- and T-cell subsets, only Th subsets were significantly 
different between groups of distinct intestinal microbiota. Individuals of 
Cluster 3 have significantly fewer Th17 and Th22 circulating cells, while Th17.1 
cell numbers were increased in individuals of Cluster 1. IgA reactivity to 
intestinal bacteria was higher in plasma than feces, and individuals of Cluster 
1 had significant higher plasma IgA reactivity against B. longum than 
individuals of Cluster 2. In conclusion, we identified three distinct fecal 
microbiota clusters, of which two clusters resembled previously-described 
"enterotypes". Global T-cell and B-cell immunity seemed unaffected, however, 
circulating Th subsets and plasma IgA reactivity were significantly different 
between Clusters. Hence, the impact of intestinal bacteria composition on human 
B cells, T cells and IgA reactivity appears limited in genetically-diverse and 
environmentally-exposed humans, but can skew antibody reactivity and Th cell 
subsets.
