It is becoming increasingly evident that the gastrointestinal microbiota has a 
significant impact on the overall health and production of the pig. This has led 
to intensified research on the composition of the gastrointestinal microbiota, 
factors affecting it, and the impact of the microbiota on health, growth 
performance, and more recently, behavior of the host. Swine production research 
has been heavily focused on assessing the effects of feed additives and dietary 
modifications to alter or take advantage of select characteristics of 
gastrointestinal microbes to improve health and feed conversion efficiency. 
Research on faecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) as a possible tool to 
improve outcomes in pigs through manipulation of the gastrointestinal microbiome 
is very recent and limited data is available. Results on FMT in humans 
demonstrating the transfer of phenotypic traits from donors to recipients and 
the high efficacy of FMT to treat Clostridium difficile infections in humans, 
together with data from pigs relating GI-tract microbiota composition with 
growth performance has likely played an important role in the interest towards 
this strategy in pig production. However, several factors can influence the 
impact of FMT on the recipient, and these need to be identified and optimized 
before this tool can be applied to pig production. There are obvious inherent 
biosecurity and regulatory issues in this strategy, since the donor's microbiome 
can never be completely screened for all possible non-desirable microorganisms. 
However, considering the success observed in humans, it seems worth 
investigating this strategy for certain applications in pig production. Further, 
FMT research may lead to the identification of specific bacterial group(s) 
essential for a particular outcome, resulting in the development of banks of 
clones which can be used as targeted therapeutics, rather than the broader 
approach applied in FMT. This review examines the factors associated with the 
use of FMT, and its potential application to swine production, and includes 
research on using the pig as model for human medical purposes.
