Proton pump inhibitor (PPI) use has been associated with microbiota alterations 
and susceptibility to Clostridioides difficile infections (CDIs) in humans. We 
assessed how PPI treatment alters the fecal microbiota and whether treatment 
promotes CDIs in a mouse model. Mice receiving a PPI treatment were gavaged with 
40 mg of omeprazole per kg of body weight during a 7-day pretreatment phase, the 
day of C. difficile challenge, and the following 9 days. We found that mice 
treated with omeprazole were not colonized by C. difficile When omeprazole 
treatment was combined with a single clindamycin treatment, one cage of mice 
remained resistant to C. difficile colonization, while the other cage was 
colonized. Treating mice with only clindamycin followed by challenge resulted in 
C. difficile colonization. 16S rRNA gene sequencing analysis revealed that 
omeprazole had minimal impact on the structure of the murine microbiota 
throughout the 16 days of omeprazole exposure. These results suggest that 
omeprazole treatment alone is not sufficient to disrupt microbiota resistance to 
C. difficile infection in mice that are normally resistant in the absence of 
antibiotic treatment.IMPORTANCE Antibiotics are the primary risk factor for 
Clostridioides difficile infections (CDIs), but other factors may also increase 
a person's risk. In epidemiological studies, proton pump inhibitor (PPI) use has 
been associated with CDI incidence and recurrence. PPIs have also been 
associated with alterations in the human intestinal microbiota in observational 
and interventional studies. We evaluated the effects of the PPI omeprazole on 
the structure of the murine intestinal microbiota and its ability to disrupt 
colonization resistance to C. difficile We found omeprazole treatment had 
minimal impact on the murine fecal microbiota and did not promote C. difficile 
colonization. Further studies are needed to determine whether other factors 
contribute to the association between PPIs and CDIs seen in humans or whether 
aspects of murine physiology may limit its utility to test these types of 
hypotheses.
