ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: In Turkish folk medicine, leaves of Sorbus 
domestica are used for the treatment of burns, cough, stomachache, bradyuria, 
kidney stone. The fruits of this plant are used for diarrhoea.
AIM OF THE STUDY: This study was carried out to investigate the effect of S. 
domestica on ulcerative colitis induced by acetic acid in rats.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The crude methanolic extract of fruits was sequentially 
fractionated into five subextracts; dichloromethane, diethyl ether, ethyl 
acetate, n-butanol and aqueous extracts. Effects of the extract, subextracts and 
fractions were investigated in acetic acid-induced rat colitis model. The 
colonic interleukin-6 (IL-6), tumor necrosis factor (TNF-α), nitrite, superoxide 
dismutase (SOD), glutathione (GSH), lipid peroxidation (LPO), catalase (CAT), 
and malondialdehyde (MDA) levels as well as the caspase-3 and myeloperoxidase 
(MPO) activities were measured to determine the activity. Histopathological 
analyzes were also performed on the colon tissue of rats.
RESULTS: The methanolic extract and diethylether subextract have led to a 
noteworthy decrease in MPO, caspase-3, IL-6, TNF-α, MDA, and nitrite levels in 
the colon tissue and blood. In addition, histopathological analysis results were 
supported by biochemical parameters. After confirmation of the activity against 
ulcerative colitis, the diethyl ether subextract was subjected to more 
chromatographic separation for the isolation of compounds 1, 2 and 3. The 
structures of these three compounds were elucidated as vanillic acid 
4-O-α-L-rhamnopyranoside (1), protocateuic acid anhydrite (2) and 
trivanilloyl-(1,3,4-trihydroxybenzol) ester (3).
CONCLUSION: In this study, the potential of S. domestica in the treatment of 
colitis was investigated. Fruits of this plant were found to have important 
anti-inflammatory and antioxidant activities. Through isolation techniques, 
vanillic acid 4-O-α-L-rhamnopyranoside, protocateuic acid anhydrite and 
trivanilloyl-(1,3,4-trihydroxybenzol) ester were determined as the main active 
components of the fruits. Consequently, S domestica might be a promising 
candidate for upcoming use the prevention and treatment of various disorders, 
such as inflammatory bowel diseases, irritable bowel syndrome and Clostridium 
difficile infection.
