(1) Background: People with disabilities may benefit from an assistance dog 
(AD). Despite regulations that prohibit the denial of ADs to public places, this 
still occurs on a regular basis. The main argument for denial of access is that 
dogs compromise hygiene with their presence, which could cause a health hazard. 
Meanwhile, people are allowed to walk into and out of public places freely. (2) 
Objective: As a pilot study, to investigate the number of Enterobacteriaceae and 
the presence of Clostridium difficile bacteria on the paws of ADs and pet dogs 
(PDs) as well as the shoe soles of their users and owners. With the results, an 
assessment can be made as to whether measures are required to reduce 
environmental contamination (e.g., in hospitals). (3) Methods: In total, 25 ADs, 
25 PDs, and their 50 users/owners participated in the study. Each participant 
walked their dog for 15-30 min prior to the sampling of the front paws. Each PD 
owner or AD user filled out a general questionnaire about the care of their 
dogs, and AD users were asked to fill out an additional questionnaire on their 
experiences regarding the admittance of their ADs to public places (in 
particular, hospitals). Dutch hospitals were questioned on their protocols 
regarding the admittance of ADs and their visitor numbers, including the 
percentage of AD users, to put these numbers into perspective. (4) Results: Dog 
paws were more often negative for Enterobacteriaceae compared to shoe soles (72% 
and 42%, respectively) and also had significantly lower bacterial counts (mean 
of 3.54log10 and 5.03log10 colony-forming units (CFUs), respectively; p < 0.05). 
This was most distinct in the comparison between PDs and their owners (3.75log10 
and 5.25log10 CFUs; p < 0.05); the numbers were similar between ADs and their 
users (3.09log10 and 4.58log10 CFUs; p = 0.2). C. difficile was found on one 
(4%) AD user's shoe soles. Moreover, 81% of AD users had been denied access with 
their current AD once or several times, the main reason being hygiene. The 
results of the visibly and invisibly disabled were significantly different. The 
number of AD users as opposed to the total number of hospital visitors was 0.03% 
in one hospital and is estimated to be 0.02% in the Netherlands. (5) 
Conclusions: The general hygiene of dogs' paws is far better than that of shoe 
soles, mostly demonstrated by the better general hygiene of PD paws compared 
with their owners' shoe soles; ADs and their users had comparable levels of 
general hygiene. In addition, the number of AD users amongst the total number of 
hospital visitors in the Netherlands is very limited. Thus, hygiene measures to 
reduce any contamination due to dog paws do not seem necessary.
