Experiments reported in this communication showed that the highly toxinogenic Cd 
79685, Cd 4784, and Wilkins Clostridium difficile strains and the moderately 
toxinogenic FD strain grown in the presence of blood adhere to polarized 
monolayers of two cultured human intestinal cell lines: the human colonic 
epithelial Caco-2 cells and the human mucus-secreting HT29-MTX cells. Scanning 
electron microscopy revealed that the bacteria interacted with well-defined 
apical microvilli of differentiated Caco-2 cells and that the bacteria strongly 
bind to the mucus layer that entirely covers the surface of the HT29-MTX cells. 
The binding of C. difficile to Caco-2 cells developed in parallel with the 
differentiation features of the Caco-2 cells, suggesting that the protein(s) 
which constitute C. difficile-binding sites are differentiation-related brush 
border protein(s). To better define this interaction, we tentatively 
characterized the mechanism(s) of adhesion of C. difficile with adherence 
assays. It was shown that heating of C. difficile grown in the presence of blood 
enhanced the bacterial interaction with the brush border of the enterocyte-like 
Caco-2 cells and the human mucus-secreting HT29-MTX cells. A labile 
surface-associated component was involved in C. difficile adhesion since washes 
of C. difficile grown in the presence of blood without heat shock decreased 
adhesion. After heating, washes of C. difficile grown in the presence of blood 
did not modify adhesion. Analysis of surface-associated proteins of C. difficile 
subjected to different culture conditions was conducted. After growth of C. 
difficile Cd 79685, Cd 4784, FD and Wilkins strains in the presence of blood and 
heating, two predominant SDS-extractable proteins with molecular masses of 12 
and 27 kDa were observed and two other proteins with masses of 48 and 31 kDa 
disappeared. Direct involvement of the 12 and 27 kDa surface-associated proteins 
in the adhesion of C. difficile strains was demonstrated by using rat 
polycolonal antibodies pAb 12 and pAb 27 directed against the 12 and 27 kDa 
proteins. Indeed, adhesion to Caco-2 cell monolayers of C. difficile strains 
grown in the presence of blood, without or with heat-shock, was blocked. Taken 
together, our results suggest that C. difficile may utilize blood components as 
adhesins to adhere to human intestinal cultured cells.
