1. Clostridium difficile toxin B glucosylates the Ras-related low molecular mass 
GTPases of the Rho subfamily thereby inactivating them. In the present report, 
toxin B was applied as a tool to test whether Rho proteins participate in the 
carbachol-induced increase in the Ca2+ sensitivity of force and myosin light 
chain (MLC) phosphorylation in intact intestinal smooth muscle. 2. Small strips 
of the longitudinal muscle of guinea-pig small intestine were incubated in toxin 
B (40 ng ml-1) overnight. Carbachol-induced force and intracellular [Ca2+], and, 
in a separate series, force and MLC phosphorylation, were determined. 3. 
Carbachol induced a biphasic contraction: an initial rapid increase in force 
(peak 1) followed by a partial relaxation and a second delayed increase in force 
(peak 2). The peak of the Ca2+ signal measured with fura-2 preceded peak 1 of 
force and then declined to a lower suprabasal steady-state level. Peak 2 was not 
associated with a significant increase in [Ca2+]. Toxin B nearly completely 
inhibited peak 2 while peak 1 was not significantly inhibited. Toxin B had no 
effect on the Ca2+ transient. 4. In control strips, MLC phosphorylation at peak 
2 was 27.7% which was significantly higher than the resting value (18.6%). The 
inhibition of the second, delayed, rise in force induced by toxin B was 
associated with complete inhibition of the increase in MLC phosphorylation. The 
resting MLC phosphorylation was not significantly different from that of the 
control strips. 5. The initial increase in MLC phosphorylation determined 3 s 
after exposure to carbachol was 54% in the control strips. Toxin B also 
inhibited this initial phosphorylation peak despite the fact that the Ca2+ 
transient and the initial increase in force were not inhibited by toxin B. This 
suggests that Rho proteins play an important role in setting the balance between 
MLC phosphorylation and dephosphorylation reactions even at high levels of 
intracellular Ca2+. 6. These findings are consistent with the hypothesis that 
the delayed rise in force elicited by carbachol is due to an increase in the 
Ca2+ sensitivity of MLC phosphorylation mediated by Rho proteins.
