Saccharomyces boulardii (Sb), a nonpathogenic yeast, has been used to prevent 
recurrences of Clostridium difficile (C.diff) -associated diarrhea. A single 
report suggested that treatment with Saccharomyces cerevisiae (Sc), commonly 
called brewer's yeast (BY), facilitates treatment of persistent C.diff 
infection. We conducted this experiment to determine whether C.diff toxin 
A-induced colonic secretion in the rat is blunted by pretreatment with either Sb 
or BY. We employed closed cecal pouches in two groups of five adult male 
Sprague-Dawley rats fed with standard chow for five days prior to the 
experiment, another group whose water was supplemented with 20 x 10(9) 
colony-forming units (CFU) of Sb per day for five days, and another group whose 
water was supplemented with 20 x 10(9) CFU of Sc per day for five days. Cecal 
pouches were infused for 3 hr with one of the following: (1) normal saline alone 
for a control group, or (2) normal saline plus 5 microg of C.diff toxin A (for 
the other control group and for the two experimental groups). Water movement was 
measured by a nonabsorbable marker technique. Sodium movement and permeability 
to mannitol were also measured. Prior to the infusion, cecal contents were 
quantitatively cultured. In the three animals whose ceca were colonized with 
less than 10(6) CFU of either yeast per gram wet cecal content, toxin A-induced 
secretion could not be attenuated. In contrast, animals whose ceca were 
colonized with more than 10(6) CFU of either yeast per gram of wet cecal content 
showed significantly less secretion after toxin A application than those which 
were not fed yeast. S. cerevisiae reduced secretion by half (N = 5, P = 0.039 
for water, 0.044 for sodium) and Sb by 75% (N = 4, P = 0.015 for water, 0.034 
for sodium). Toxin-induced increases in permeability to [3H]mannitol from 
systemic circulation to cecum could not be blunted by either yeast. We conclude 
that rat ceca can be colonized by either organism and that both organisms reduce 
C.diff toxin A-mediated secretion. We speculate that both organisms might have 
benefit in human C.diff-associated enterocolitis. Further studies of their 
mechanisms of action as well as clinical trials for the prevention and treatment 
of human C.diff infections should be pursued.
