At the surface of phagocytes, antibody-opsonized particles are recognized by 
surface receptors for the Fc portion of immunoglobulins (FcRs) that mediate 
their capture by an actin-driven process called phagocytosis which is poorly 
defined. We have analyzed the function of the Rho proteins Rac1 and CDC42 in the 
high affinity receptor for IgE (FcepsilonRI)-mediated phagocytosis using 
transfected rat basophil leukemia (RBL-2H3) mast cells expressing dominant 
inhibitory forms of CDC42 and Rac1. Binding of opsonized particles to 
untransfected RBL-2H3 cells led to the accumulation of F-actin at the site of 
contact with the particles and further, to particle internalization. This 
process was inhibited by Clostridium difficile toxin B, a general inhibitor of 
Rho GTP-binding proteins. Dominant inhibition of Rac1 or CDC42 function severely 
inhibited particle internalization but not F-actin accumulation. Inhibition of 
CDC42 function resulted in the appearance of pedestal-like structures with 
particles at their tips, while particles bound at the surface of the Rac1 mutant 
cell line were enclosed within thin membrane protrusions that did not fuse. 
These phenotypic differences indicate that Rac1 and CDC42 have distinct 
functions and may act cooperatively in the assembly of the phagocytic cup. 
Inhibition of phagocytosis in the mutant cell lines was accompanied by the 
persistence of tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins around bound particles. 
Phagocytic cup closure and particle internalization were also blocked when 
phosphotyrosine dephosphorylation was inhibited by treatment of RBL-2H3 cells 
with phenylarsine oxide, an inhibitor of protein phosphotyrosine phosphatases. 
Altogether, our data show that Rac1 and CDC42 are required to coordinate actin 
filament organization and membrane extension to form phagocytic cups and to 
allow particle internalization during FcR-mediated phagocytosis. Our data also 
suggest that Rac1 and CDC42 are involved in phosphotyrosine dephosphorylation 
required for particle internalization.
