OBJECTIVE: Sentrin, a novel antiapoptotic molecule, has been shown to interact 
with the signal-competent form of Fas/APO-1 and tumor necrosis factor receptor I 
(TNFRI), and thereby, to protect cells against anti-Fas/APO-1- and TNF-induced 
cell death. Since reduced apoptosis in the synovial lining is supposed to 
contribute to synovial hyperplasia in rheumatoid arthritis (RA), we searched for 
the expression of sentrin-1 messenger RNA (mRNA) in synovium from patients with 
RA.
METHODS: The expression of sentrin-1 mRNA was examined by in situ hybridization 
on snap-frozen sections of normal and RA synovial tissues as well as on 
paraffin-embedded RA synovial specimens, including the interface of 
cartilage-bone and invading synovium. Immunohistochemical double labeling after 
in situ hybridization was performed to further characterize sentrin-1 
mRNA-expressing cells. In addition, quantitative analysis of sentrin-1 mRNA 
expression in RA synovial fibroblasts (RASF), osteoarthritis synovial 
fibroblasts (OASF), and normal fibroblasts was performed by quantitative 
real-time polymerase chain reaction. Expression levels were standardized to the 
expression of GAPDH. The in vivo maintenance of sentrin expression in RASF 
aggressively invading human cartilage was explored in the SCID mouse model of 
RA.
RESULTS: A marked expression of sentrin-1 mRNA could be seen in all RA synovial 
specimens, predominantly in SF of the lining layer and at sites of invasion of 
RA synovium into cartilage. In normal synovial tissues, no sentrin-1 mRNA was 
detectable. RASF showed a maximum 32.5-fold (mean +/- SD 14.9 +/- 11.6) increase 
of sentrin-1 mRNA expression compared with normal fibroblasts and a maximum 
31.4-fold (mean +/-SD 14.3 +/- 10.9) increase compared with OASF. When 
coimplanted with normal human cartilage in the SCID mouse model, invading RASF 
maintained their sentrin-1 mRNA expression for at least 60 days in vivo.
CONCLUSION: The marked expression of sentrin in rheumatoid synovial tissue, but 
not in normal or OA synovial tissue, may contribute to the modulation of Fas- 
and TNFR-mediated apoptosis in RA synovium, and thereby extend the lifespan of 
invasive, cartilage-destructive SF.
