Infection with mycobacterial species, including Mycobacterium tuberculosis, has 
long been implicated in the etiopathology of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) on the 
basis of clinical and pathological similarities between tuberculosis and RA. 
Despite evidence of immune responses to mycobacterial antigens in RA patient 
synovial fluid, cross-reactivity between these and host joint antigens, and the 
presence of M. tuberculosis protein antigen in RA synovial fluid, a definite 
causal association with RA has not been shown. Previous studies from our 
laboratory using reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR) of bacterial rRNAs have 
shown RA synovium to be colonized by a diverse range of bacteria, most of 
commensal origin. However, M. tuberculosis group organism (MTG) RNA sequences 
were found in one RA patient tissue. Since this was considered of sufficient 
interest to warrant further investigation, we devised a M. tuberculosis-specific 
nested RT-PCR test which could be used for detection of MTG in a mixed pool of 
bacterial crDNAs. This test was used to investigate the distribution of MTG in 
RA synovial tissue and also non-RA arthritis and healthy control tissues and was 
also used to examine the tissue distribution of MTG in an acute and chronic 
model of M. tuberculosis infection in the BALB/c mouse. MTG sequences were found 
in a high proportion of RA patient synovial tissues but also in non-RA arthritis 
control tissues at lower frequency. This likely reflects trafficking of 
persistent M. bovis BCG to inflamed joint tissue, irrespective of cause. MTG 
were not found in healthy synovial tissue or the tissue of patients with 
undifferentiated arthritis. In both the acute and chronic models of infection in 
BALB/c mice, M. tuberculosis was also found to have trafficked to joint tissues, 
however, no signs of inflammation, arthritis, or pathology associated with M. 
tuberculosis infection was seen. These combined results would argue against a 
specific causal role of MTG in RA-like arthritis; however, their role as 
adjuvant in immune dysfunction in an innately susceptible host cannot be 
excluded.
