Many joint and bone diseases are caused by, or associated with vascular changes. 
Particularly in rheumatoid arthritis, vascular sprouting of synovial vessels 
plays a major role in the generation of joint pathology. To assess the effects 
of pharmaceuticals that are designed to inhibit neovascularization, we developed 
a quantitative procedure to measure vascular changes in cross-sections of the 
mouse knee joint during arthritic inflammation. Arthritis was induced in the 
knee joint of C57Black6 mice by a single subpatellar injection of methylated BSA 
after previous immunization. Total vascularity was visualized with a specific 
monoclonal rat anti-mouse antibody (9F1). Functional vessels were detected with 
the fluorescent perfusion marker Hoechst 33342. The localization of Hoechst and 
the vascular marker 9F1 were analyzed in separate images with an automated 
digital image processing system. By combining the two images, total vascularity 
and the perfusion status of the vessels during arthritis could be established. 
The digital image system measures synovial area (SA), number of all blood 
vessels (NBV) and the number of perfused blood vessels (NpBV). From these 
parameters the percentage of perfused vessels (perfusion fraction; PF), the 
vessel density (VD = NBV/SA) and the density of perfused vessels (VDp = NpBV/SA) 
can be calculated. The measurements showed that the area of synovial tissue had 
increased during arthritis. Moreover, both the number of blood vessels (NBV) and 
the number of perfused vessels (NpBV) in the synovial area had increased 
significantly on Days 4 and 7 after arthritis induction. This procedure enabled 
quantitation of total vascularity and of functional blood vessels in 
cross-sections of synovial tissue. It is expected to be a powerful tool, not 
only to analyze the effects of anti-angiogenic therapies in animal models of 
arthritis, but could also be applicable to study vascular and perfusion changes 
in vascular related diseases of the skeleton.
