Diclofenac (DCLF) is a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug that is widely used 
for the treatment of osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, ankylosing 
spondylitis, and acute muscle pain conditions. Toxic doses of DCLF can cause 
nephrotoxicity in humans and experimental animals. However, whether this 
DCLF-induced nephrotoxicity involves apoptotic cell death in addition to 
necrosis is unknown. The goals of this investigation were to determine whether 
DCLF-induced nephrotoxicity involves oxidative stress and apoptotic type genomic 
DNA fragmentation, and if so, whether DCLF-induced oxidative stress and DNA 
fragmentation cause apoptotic cell death in mouse kidneys. Male ICR mice (CD-1; 
25-45 g), fed ad libitum, were administered nephrotoxic doses of DCLF (100, 200, 
300 mg/Kg, po) and sacrificed 24 h later. Blood was collected to evaluate renal 
injury (BUN), lipid peroxidation (MDA: malondialdehyde levels), and superoxide 
dismutase (SOD) activity (a marker of oxidative stress). Kidney tissues were 
analyzed both quantitatively and qualitatively to determine the degree and type 
of DNA damage, and evaluated histopathologically for the presence of apoptotic 
characteristics in the nucleus of diverse types of kidney cells. Results show 
that diclofenac is a powerful nephrotoxicant (at 100, 200, and 300 mg/kg: 4.7-, 
4.9-, and 5.0-fold increases in BUN compared to the control, respectively) and a 
strong inducer of oxidative stress (significant increase in MDA levels). 
Oxidative stress induced by DCLF was also coupled with massive kidney DNA 
fragmentation (100, 200, and 300 mg/kg: 3-, 8-, and 10-fold increases compared 
to control, respectively). A dose-dependent increase in MDA levels and SOD 
activity was also observed, which indicated a link between oxidative stress and 
nephrotoxicity. Qualitative analysis of DNA fragmentation by gel electrophoresis 
showed a DNA ladder indicative of Ca2+-Mg2+-endonuclease activation. 
Histopathological examination of kidney sections revealed numerous apoptotic 
nuclei across proximal and distal tubular cell linings. Collectively, these data 
for the first time suggest that DCLF-induced nephrotoxicity may involve 
production of reactive oxygen species leading to oxidative stress and massive 
genomic DNA fragmentation, and these two free radical mediated events may 
ultimately translate into apoptotic cell death of kidney cells in vivo, and 
reveal a DNA-active role for DCLF.
