The elevated expression of cell adhesion molecules (CAMs) on the lumenal surface 
of vascular endothelial cells is a critical early event in the complex 
inflammatory process. The adhesive interactions of these CAMs that include 
E-selectin, ICAM-1, and VCAM-1 with their counter-receptors on leukocytes, such 
as integrins of the alpha(L)beta(2) family, result in migration of the 
leukocytes to the site of inflammation and cause tissue injury. Pharmaceutical 
agents that could suppress the induced expression of one or more of these cell 
adhesion molecules would provide a novel mechanism to attenuate the inflammatory 
responses associated with chronic inflammatory diseases. A-205804 (1), a potent 
and selective inhibitor of the induced expression of E-selectin and ICAM-1 over 
VCAM-1, was further modified with emphasis at the C-4 and C-2 positions to 
identify a more potent drug candidate with a good pharmacokinetic profile and 
physical properties. Replacement of the C-4 sulfur linkage in 1 with an oxygen 
atom eliminated one of the two major metabolites for this lead molecule. The 
para-position of the 4-phenoxy group of the thieno[2,3-c]pyridine lead is found 
to be very critical for a higher in vitro potency and selectivity of E-selectin 
and ICAM-1 over VCAM-1 expression. This position is presumably close to the 
solvent-accessible region of the target protein-inhibitor complex. An attempt to 
install a water-solubilizing group at the para-position of the phenoxy group to 
increase the aqueous solubility of this lead series through various linkages 
failed to provide an ideal inhibitor. Only small substituents such as fluorine 
are tolerated at the meta- and ortho-positions of the 4-phenoxy to retain a good 
in vitro potency. Bromo, trifluoromethyl, pyrazol-1-yl, and imidazol-1-yl are 
among the better substituents at the para-position. With fine-tuning at the C-2 
position we discovered a series of very potent (IC(50) < 5 nM for ICAM-1) and 
selective (>200-fold vs VCAM-1) inhibitors with a good pharmacokinetic profile. 
Demonstrated efficacy in a rat rheumatoid arthritis model and in a mice asthma 
model with selected compounds is also reported.
