OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effects of M40403, a synthetic mimetic of 
superoxide dismutase (SOD), on collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) in rats.
METHODS: CIA was elicited in Lewis rats by intradermal injection of 100 microl 
of an emulsion of bovine type II collagen (CII) in Freund's incomplete adjuvant 
at the base of the tail. A second injection was given on day 21.
RESULTS: Immunization induced an erosive arthritis of the hind paws. Macroscopic 
evidence of CIA first appeared as periarticular erythema and edema in the hind 
paws by days 24-26 after the first injection, with a 100% incidence by days 27. 
Severity progressed over a 35-day period. Radiography revealed soft tissue 
swelling and focal resorption of bone, together with osteophyte formation in the 
tibiotarsal joint. Histopathologic features included erosion of the articular 
cartilage at the joint margins and subchondral bone resorption associated with 
bone-derived multinucleated cell-containing granulomatous lesions. Treatment 
with M40403 (2-10 mg/kg/day) starting at the onset of arthritis (day 25) 
ameliorated the clinical signs on days 26-35 and improved the histologic 
findings in the joint and paw. Immunohistochemical analysis for nitrotyrosine (a 
marker of peroxynitrite formation) and poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP; a 
nuclear enzyme activated by DNA single-strand damage) revealed positive staining 
in the inflamed joints of CII-treated rats, suggestive of the formation of 
peroxynitrite and DNA damage, both of which were markedly reduced by M40403 
treatment. Radiographic evidence of protection from bone resorption, osteophyte 
formation, and soft tissue swelling was apparent in the tibiotarsal joints of 
M40403-treated rats. Arthritic rats treated with M40403 gained weight at the 
same rate and to the same extent as normal, nonarthritic rats.
CONCLUSION: This study shows that a low molecular weight mimetic of SOD, M40403, 
attenuates the degree of chronic inflammation, tissue damage, and bone damage 
associated with CIA in the rat, and supports the possible use of SOD mimetics as 
therapeutic agents for the management of chronic diseases such as rheumatoid 
arthritis.
