BACKGROUND: Pharmacological antagonism of VLA-4 (Very Late Antigen 4, 
alpha(4)beta(1) integrin) has become an attractive target for the treatment of 
predominantly eosinophil mediated disease states such as asthma, allergic 
rhinitis, multiple sclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis, diabetes, and inflammatory 
bowel disease. Gene knockouts of the alpha(4)-integrin subunit of VLA-4 or its 
cell surface ligand, VCAM-1, however, have been shown to result in 
embryo-lethality in homozygous null mice due to defects in chorio-allantoic or 
epi-myocardial fusion. Although gene knockout phenotypes are not always 
manifested by pharmacological antagonism, those studies suggested that VLA-4 
antagonists might cause embryo-lethality or drug-induced malformations.
METHODS: To test these concepts, early neurulating rat embryos were cultured by 
the methods of New ('78) after intra-coelomic microinjection of a VLA-4 blocking 
antibody or in the presence of small molecule VLA-4 antagonists.
RESULTS: Defects in chorio-allantoic fusion were induced after microinjection of 
VLA4 blocking antibody and after continuous exposure to small molecule 
antagonists. In a minority of affected embryos chorio-allantoic fusion was 
completely blocked whereas the majority of affected embryos had only superficial 
chorio-allantoic fusion and the allantois was enlarged and edematous. Although 
the allantoic mesoderm covered the trophoblasts of the chorionic plate and 
contained blood vessels there was only minimal invasion of the trophoblasts by 
the allantoic mesoderm. The lowest observed effect level generally correlated 
with the IC(approximately 95), as determined in 90% plasma.
DISCUSSION: Based on these data, VLA-4 antagonism might represent a significant 
risk to the developing embryo/fetus. In vitro exposure, however, is "constant" 
and does not take into account the elimination phase of these xenobiotics in 
vivo. Given the high concentrations required to elicit an effect, therapeutic 
blood levels in vivo may be several fold lower than those that affect the 
conceptus, depending on the tissue penetration of the compound and the route of 
administration. VLA-4 also exists in a range of conformations and activation 
states in vivo and the gene KOs and present studies do not define whether these 
developmental processes are dependent upon a particular activation state of 
VLA-4. Therefore, state-selective antagonists may have an improved embryonic 
safety profile. Additional studies will be required to determine potential 
effects of VLA-4 antagonists on embryo/fetal development in vivo.
