OBJECTIVE: Complement has been repeatedly implicated in the pathogenesis of 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) based on studies showing reduced levels of native 
complement components and increased levels of complement metabolites in plasma, 
synovial fluid (SF), and synovial tissue (ST) of RA patients. However, there is 
limited information on local production and activation of key factors of the 
complement cascade in RA synovium and their potential modulation by novel 
anticytokine therapies. This study was undertaken to characterize the expression 
of complement proteins and receptors in RA SF and ST.
METHODS: Using in situ hybridization, immunohistochemistry, and Western blot 
techniques, we assessed the presence of complement proteins C3, factor B (FB), 
and C5b-9, as well as the expression of complement receptors C3aR and C5aR in 
rheumatoid synovium. C3 and FB levels in SF were determined by enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay. Functional assessment was performed by examining the 
effects of soluble tumor necrosis factor receptor (sTNFR) p55 gene transfer in 
the SCID mouse model of RA.
RESULTS: Complement proteins and receptors could be localized in all RA synovial 
specimens, whereas in osteoarthritis (OA) synovium, only a few, single cells 
expressed complement proteins and receptors. No differences were noted in the 
concentration of C3 between RA and OA in SF; however, FB levels were markedly 
reduced in RA versus OA SF. In RA synovium, in contrast to OA synovium, local 
expression of complement factor and complement receptor messenger RNA was found 
throughout the various ST compartments, suggesting that activation of the 
complement cascade occurs in all parts of the rheumatoid synovium. Moreover, 
C5aR expression was up-regulated following overexpression of sTNFR p55 by 
adenovirus-based gene transfer.
CONCLUSION: In summary, local complement production and activation may play an 
important role in RA, and specific modulation and inhibition of local complement 
production could be an attractive therapeutic target for RA.
