Angiogenesis is implicated in the pathogenesis of cancer, rheumatoid arthritis, 
and atherosclerosis and in the treatment of coronary artery and peripheral 
vascular disease. Here, cholesterol-lowering agents, 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl 
coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase inhibitors, are shown to interfere with 
angiogenesis. In vivo, the HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor simvastatin 
dose-dependently inhibited capillary growth in both vascular endothelial growth 
factor-stimulated chick chorioallantoic membranes and basic fibroblast growth 
factor-stimulated mouse corneas. In vitro, the development of tubelike 
structures by human microvascular endothelial cells cultured on 3D collagen gels 
was inhibited at simvastatin concentrations similar to those found in the serum 
of patients on therapeutic doses of this agent. HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors 
interfered with angiogenesis via inhibition of the geranylgeranylation and 
membrane localization of RhoA. Simvastatin inhibited membrane localization of 
RhoA with a concentration dependence similar to that for the inhibition of tube 
formation, whereas geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate, the substrate for the 
geranylgeranylation of Rho, reversed the effect of simvastatin on tube formation 
and on the membrane localization of RhoA. Furthermore, tube formation was 
inhibited by GGTI, a specific inhibitor of the geranylgeranylation of Rho; by C3 
exotoxin, which inactivates Rho; and by the adenoviral expression of a 
dominant-negative RhoA mutant. The expression of a dominant-activating RhoA 
mutant reversed the effect of simvastatin on tube formation. Finally, HMG-CoA 
reductase inhibitors inhibited signaling by vascular endothelial growth factor, 
Akt, and focal adhesion kinase, three RhoA-dependent pathways known to be 
involved in angiogenesis. This study demonstrates a new relationship between 
lipid metabolism and angiogenesis and an antiangiogenic effect of HMG-CoA 
reductase inhibitors with possible important therapeutic implications.
