Elevated levels of chemokines, such as Regulated upon Activation, Normal T cell 
Expressed and Secreted (RANTES), Monocyte Chemotactic Protein-1 (MCP-1), 
Macrophage Inflammatory Protein-1alpha (MIP-1alpha), and Macrophage Inflammatory 
Protein-1beta (MIP-1beta) have been found in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and 
juvenile arthritis (JA), and they may be associated with the pathogenesis of 
these diseases. These chemokines are implicated in the migration of specific 
leukocytes into the joints. Omega-3 (omega3) fatty acid rich-fish oil (FO) and 
vitamin E may delay the progress of certain autoimmune diseases. The present 
study was designed to understand the effects of dietary lipids (omega-6 and 
omega-3 fatty acids) and vitamin E on the production of chemokines in 
autoimmune-prone MRL/lpr (a mouse model for RA) and congenic control MRL/++ 
mice. The MRL mice were fed for 4.5 months omega-6 and omega-3 diets that varied 
in lipid sources (corn oil; CO and fish oil; FO) and vitamin E levels (269 
I.U./kg and 694 I.U./kg diet). Spleen cells were isolated and cultured 
aseptically in the presence of PHA for 48 h at 37 degrees C and the levels of 
chemokines (RANTES, JE/MCP-1 and MIP-1alpha) were determined in the cell-free 
supernatants. The levels of RANTES and JE/MCP-1 were significantly higher in 
MRL/lpr mice compared to MRL/++ mice. The FO had differential effect on RANTES 
and MCP-1 production by spleen cells. The production of RANTES and JE/MCP-1 by 
spleen cells in mice fed the FO diets was significantly lower than in mice fed 
the CO diets (p < 0.0001). The levels of vitamin E did not affect the production 
of RANTES and JE/MCP-1. The levels of vitamin E had a significant effect on 
MIP-1alpha as the spleen cells of mice fed diets containing 694 IU/kg diet of 
vitamin E produced significantly higher levels of MIP-1alpha compared to the 
group of mice fed the diets containing 269 IU of vitamin E (p < 0.0001). The 
data obtained from this study in MRL/lpr and MRL/++ mice suggest that FO diets 
containing omega-3 fatty acids are beneficial in decreasing the levels of 
certain pro-inflammatory chemokines (RANTES and MCP-1) thereby delaying the 
onset of and severity of autoimmune symptoms in MRL/lpr mouse model.
