OBJECTIVE: Anti-RA33 antibodies occur in patients with rheumatoid arthritis 
(RA), systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), and mixed connective tissue disease 
(MCTD) and target the A2/B1 protein of the heterogeneous nuclear 
ribonucleoprotein (hnRNP) complex 4 which forms part of the spliceosome. The aim 
of the present study was to evaluate the immune response and pathological 
features induced in mice immunized with anti-RA33 antibodies or patient-derived 
recombinant single-chain variable fragments (scFv) of anti-RA33 antibodies.
METHODS: In the first set of the experiment, two strains of mice (C57BL/6J and 
BALB/c) were immunized with IgG preparations obtained from two patients with RA 
and one normal donor. One of the patients had high titer anti-RA33 antibodies; 
the other one showed weak borderline reactivity. In the second set of the 
experiment three groups of C57BL/6J mice were immunized, respectively, with 
affinity-purified (AP) anti-RA33 antibodies, scFv of anti-RA33 antibodies and 
normal human IgG. The immunological response induced in immunized mice was 
studied by immunoblotting and line immunoassay (LIA). The presence of arthritis, 
serositis or myositis was assessed six-months following initial immunization.
RESULTS: While anti-RA33 antibodies developed in only two of the mice immunized 
with different human IgG fractions, anti-RA33 antibodies were clearly detected 
in 7 sera of 13 mice immunized with AP anti-RA33 antibodies three months after 
the boost immunization and, moreover, also in 2 sera of 13 mice immunized with 
scFv of anti-RA33 antibodies. In contrast, mice immunized with normal human IgG 
did not develop anti-RA33 antibodies. Interestingly, transient autoantibody 
production against another nuclear autoantigen, U1 snRNP, was observed in 3 
C57BL/6J mice immunized with scFv and in 1 mouse immunized with AP 
autoantibodies. However, these immunological responses were not associated with 
pathological findings.
CONCLUSIONS: Active immunization of naive mice with AP anti-RA33 antibodies and 
scFv of anti-RA33 antibodies resulted on the one hand in the production of 
murine anti-RA33 antibodies and led, on the other hand, to transient 
"autoantibody spread" to snRNP component of the spliceosome and other nuclear 
autoantigens. This "autoantibody spread" probably reflected disregulation of the 
idiotypic anti-idiotypic cascade.
