OBJECTIVE: To assay antifilaggrin autoantibodies, we developed an enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) using a "citrullinated" recombinant rat filaggrin. 
Our objectives were to assess its value for diagnosing rheumatoid arthritis (RA) 
and to compare the results with those obtained using 4 other reference methods 
for detection of antifilaggrin autoantibodies, including the commercially 
available ELISA that uses a modified "citrullinated" synthetic peptide derived 
from the sequence of human filaggrin (CCP-ELISA).
METHODS: We analyzed 711 sera from patients with well-characterized rheumatic 
diseases, including 240 patients with RA. Antifilaggrin autoantibodies were 
detected by an ELISA using a recombinant rat filaggrin deiminated in vitro as 
immunosorbent (ArFA-ELISA). The results considered were the differences between 
the optical densities obtained on deiminated and nondeiminated proteins. 
Antibodies to rat esophagus epithelium were detected by indirect 
immunofluorescence, while antibodies to human filaggrin were detected by 
immunoblotting and by a recently described ELISA using a deiminated recombinant 
human filaggrin. Finally, CCP-ELISA was performed according to the 
manufacturer's recommendations.
RESULTS: At the titer thresholds allowing diagnostic specificities of 0.95, 
0.985, and 0.99 to be reached, the diagnostic sensitivities of the ArFA-ELISA 
were 0.76, 0.67, and 0.65, respectively. At these 3 thresholds, the 
sensitivities were significantly higher than those of the 4 other tests. Despite 
incomplete overlapping of the 5 tests, the high diagnostic performance of the 
ArFA-ELISA allows us to propose this test to replace all the other methods for 
antifilaggrin autoantibody detection.
CONCLUSION: ArFA-ELISA appears to be the most efficient test among those 
available for the detection of antifilaggrin autoantibodies, in terms of 
diagnostic accuracy for RA. Its diagnostic performance in early RA and its 
prognostic value are currently under evaluation.
