Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is characterised by the presence of an inflammatory 
synovitis accompanied by destruction of joint cartilage and bone. Destruction of 
cartilage matrix results predominantly from the action of connective tissue 
proteinases released by RA synovial tissues, chondrocytes, and pannus tissue. 
Several lines of evidence in RA and in animal models of arthritis support a role 
for osteoclasts in the pathogenesis of bone erosions. RA synovial tissues 
produce a variety of cytokines and growth factors that may increase osteoclast 
formation, activity, and/or survival. These include interleukin 1alpha 
(IL1alpha) and beta, tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha), IL11, IL17, and 
macrophage colony stimulating factor (M-CSF). Receptor activator of NFkappaB 
ligand (RANKL) is an essential factor for osteoclast differentiation and also 
functions to augment T cell-dendritic cell cooperative interactions. CD4+ T 
cells and synovial fibroblasts derived from RA synovium are sources of RANKL. 
Furthermore, in collagen induced arthritis (CIA), blockade with osteoprotegerin 
(OPG), a decoy receptor for RANKL, results in protection from bone destruction. 
To further evaluate the role of osteoclasts in focal bone erosion in arthritis, 
arthritis was generated in the RANKL knockout mouse using a serum transfer 
model. Despite ongoing inflammation, the degree of bone erosion in arthritic 
RANKL knockout mice, as assessed by microcomputed tomography and correlated 
histopathological analysis, was dramatically reduced compared with that seen in 
arthritic control mice. Cartilage damage was present in both the arthritic RANKL 
knockout mice and in arthritic control littermates, with a trend toward milder 
cartilage damage in the RANKL knockout mice. This study supports the hypothesis 
that osteoclasts play an important part in the pathogenesis of focal bone 
erosion in arthritis, and reveals distinct mechanisms of cartilage destruction 
and bone erosion in this animal model of arthritis. Future directions for 
research in this area include the further investigation of a possible direct 
role for the RANKL/RANK/OPG system in cartilage metabolism, and the possible 
role of other cell types and cytokines in bone erosion in arthritis.
