During the pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis (RA), the synovial fibroblasts 
increase in number and produce proinflammatory cytokines and matrix 
metalloproteinases (MMPs) that function to promote inflammation and joint 
destruction. Recent investigations have suggested that cell cycle activity and 
inflammation may be linked. However, little is known about the mechanisms 
responsible for the coordinate regulation of proliferation and the expression of 
proinflammatory molecules in RA synovial fibroblasts. Here, we demonstrate a 50 
+/- 10% decrease in the expression of p21, a cell cycle inhibitor, in the 
synovial fibroblast population from RA compared with osteoarthritis (OA) 
synovial tissue. Moreover, p21 positivity in the synovial fibroblasts inversely 
correlates with medium synovial lining thickness (r = -0.76; p < 0.02). The 
expression of p21 is also reduced in isolated RA synovial fibroblasts compared 
with OA synovial fibroblasts. Adenovirus-mediated delivery of p21 (Ad-p21) 
arrests both RA and OA synovial fibroblasts in the G(0)/G(1) phase of the cell 
cycle without inducing cytotoxicity. However, the spontaneous production of IL-6 
and MMP-1 is suppressed only in the Ad-p21-infected RA synovial fibroblasts, 
indicating a novel role for p21 in RA. Analyses of p21-deficient mouse synovial 
fibroblasts reveal a 100-fold increase in IL-6 protein and enhance IL-6 and 
MMP-3 mRNA. Restoration of p21, but not overexpression of Rb, which also induces 
G(0)/G(1) cell cycle arrest, decreases IL-6 synthesis in p21-null synovial 
fibroblasts. Furthermore, in RA synovial fibroblasts the ectopic expression of 
p21 reduces activation of the AP-1 transcription factor. Additionally, p21-null 
synovial fibroblasts display enhanced activation of AP-1 compared with wild-type 
synovial fibroblasts. These data suggest that alterations in p21 expression may 
activate AP-1 leading to enhanced proinflammatory cytokine and MMP production 
and development of autoimmune disease.
