Bone marrow transplantation is becoming a powerful strategy for the treatment of 
hematologic disorders (leukemia, aplastic anemia, etc.), congenital 
immunodeficiencies, metabolic disorders and also autoimmune diseases. Using 
various animal models for autoimmune diseases, we have previously found that 
allogeneic (not autologous) bone marrow transplantation can be used to treat 
autoimmune diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, 
immune thrombocytic purpura, insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, chronic 
glomerulonephritis and certain types of non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. 
In contrast, we have found that the transplantation of T-cell-depleted bone 
marrow cells or partially purified hemopoietic stem cells from autoimmune-prone 
mice to normal mice leads to the induction of autoimmune diseases in the 
recipients. These findings have recently been confirmed even in humans; 
autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, 
multiple sclerosis and Crohn's disease were resolved after allogeneic bone 
marrow transplantation. However, there have recently been reports on the rapid 
recurrence or persistence of autoimmune diseases after autologous bone marrow 
transplantation. Conversely, the adoptive transfer of autoimmune diseases such 
as myasthenia gravis, insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus and Graves' disease by 
allogeneic bone marrow transplantation from donors to recipients has been 
reported. Owing to these findings, we have proposed that autoimmune diseases are 
"stem cell disorders." We have thus succeeded in treating autoimmune diseases in 
various autoimmune-prone mice, except MRL/lpr mice, by conventional bone marrow 
transplantation. The MRL/lpr mouse itself is radiosensitive (<8.5 Gy), while the 
abnormal hemopoietic stem cells of the MRL/lpr mouse are radioresistant (>8.5 
Gy); conventional bone marrow transplantation (8.5 Gy plus bone marrow 
transplantation) has a transient effect on autoimmune diseases, which recur 
three months after the bone marrow transplantation. However, bone marrow 
transplantation plus bone grafts (to recruit donor stromal cells) completely 
prevents the recurrence of autoimmune diseases in MRL/lpr mice. Donor-derived 
stromal cells (including mesenchymal stem cells) thus seem to play a crucial 
role in successful allogeneic bone marrow transplantation, since there is a 
major histocompatibility complex restriction between hemopoietic stem cells and 
stromal cells. We have, however, found that the combination of bone marrow 
transplantation plus bone grafts has no effect on the treatment of autoimmune 
diseases in MRL/lpr mice, since MRL/lpr mice become more radiosensitive after 
the onset of lupus nephritis due to the development of uremic enterocolitis. To 
reduce the cytotoxic effect of radiation on the intestine, we carried out 
fractionated irradiation and devised a new strategy. We injected allogeneic 
whole bone marrow cells (including a small number [<3%] of T cells, hemopoietic 
stem cells and stromal cells) from donors directly into the intra-bone marrow of 
recipients so that donor-derived hemopoietic cells including stromal cells could 
effectively accumulate in the bone marrow. All the MRL/lpr mice survived more 
than one year (>60 weeks after birth) without the recurrence of autoimmune 
diseases, and immunological functions were completely restored even when the 
radiation dose was reduced to 5 Gy x 2. These findings suggest that intra-bone 
marrow injection-bone marrow transplantation can be used to treat intractable 
autoimmune diseases under reduced radiation doses without using any 
immunosuppressants.Intra-bone marrow injection-bone marrow transplantation seems 
to be the best strategy for allogeneic bone marrow transplantation: 1) no 
graft-versus-host disease develops even if T cells are not depleted from the 
bone marrow; 2) no graft failure occurs even if the dose of radiation as the 
conditioning for bone marrow transplantation is reduced to 5 Gy x 2; 3) 
hemopoietic recovery is rapid; and 4) T-cell functions are completely restored 
even in donor-recipient combinations across the major histocompatibility complex 
barriers. Using cynomolgus monkeys, we have recently established a new method 
(the "perfusion method") for collecting bone marrow cells from the long bones 
(femur, humerus, etc.) without peripheral blood contamination. This method has 
various advantages: 1) no graft-versus-host disease develops even in cynomolgus 
monkeys, since the percentage of T cells in the bone marrow cells collected is 
less than 3%; 2) a large number of bone marrow cells can be collected quickly 
and safely; and 3) the bone marrow cells collected contain stromal cells 
including mesenchymal stem cells. We therefore believe that this method 
(intra-bone marrow injection-bone marrow transplantation in conjunction with the 
perfusion method) will become a powerful new strategy for not only allogeneic 
bone marrow transplantation but also organ transplantation in conjunction with 
bone marrow transplantation. Furthermore, this method could become a valuable 
strategy in regeneration therapy for injured organs and tissues (myocardial 
infarction, cerebral infarction, Alzheimer's disease, etc.), since it can 
efficiently reconstitute the recipient with both donor-derived hemopoietic stem 
cells and mesenchymal stem cells.
