The aim of the study was to investigate the relationship between invasion and 
proliferation in rheumatoid arthritis synovial fibroblasts (RASFs). In vitro, 
RASFs, normal synovial fibroblasts (NSFs), and RASFs transformed with SV40 
T-antigen (RASF(SV40)) were analyzed for the expression of cell surface markers 
(Thy1, VCAM-1, ICAM-1, CD40, CD44) and their proliferation by flow cytometry. 
Furthermore, colony-forming unit assays were performed and the expression of 
matrix metalloproteinases (MMP)-14 and cathepsin K mRNA were determined by 
real-time polymerase chain reaction. In vivo, in the severe combined 
immunodeficiency (SCID) mouse co-implantation model, RASFs, NSFs, and RASF(SV40) 
were tested for cartilage invasion, cellular density, and for their expression 
of the cell cycle-associated protein Ki67. In the SCID mouse co-implantation 
model, RASFs invaded significantly stronger into the cartilage than NSFs and 
RASF(SV40). Of note, RASF(SV40) cells formed tumor-like tissues, and the 
cellular density adjacent to the cartilage was significantly higher than in 
RASFs or NSFs. In turn, the proliferation marker Ki67 was strongly expressed in 
the SV40-transformed synoviocytes in SCID mice, but not in RASFs, and 
specifically not at sites of cartilage invasion. Using the colony-forming unit 
assay, RASFs and NSFs did not form colonies, whereas RASF(SV40) lost contact 
inhibition. In vitro, the proliferative rate of RASFs was low (4.3% S phase) in 
contrast to RASF(SV40) (24.4%). Expression of VCAM-1 was significantly higher, 
whereas of ICAM-1 was significantly lower, in RASFs than in RASF(SV40). CD40 was 
significantly stronger expressed in RASF(SV40), whereas CD44 and AS02 were 
present at the same degree in almost all synoviocytes. Expression of cathepsin K 
and matrix metalloproteinase-14 mRNA was significantly higher in RASFs than in 
the RASF(SV40). Our data demonstrate clearly that invasion of cartilage is 
mediated by activated RASFs characterized by increased expression of adhesion 
molecules, matrix-degrading enzymes, but does not depend on cellular 
proliferation, suggesting the dissociation of invasion and proliferation in 
RASFs.
