Synovial inflammation in rheumatoid arthritis is closely related to the 
formation of ectopic lymphoid microstructures. In synovial tissue from some 
patients, one finds seemingly diffuse infiltrates; in others, T cells and B 
cells cluster in aggregates with interdigitating dendritic cells (DCs) but no 
follicular DCs (FDCs). In a third group, T cell/B cell follicles with germinal 
center (GC) reactions are generated. Within a given patient, aggregates and GCs 
are mutually exclusive and stable over time. Because antigen storage capacity, 
lymphoid density, and three-dimensional topography of GCs optimize immune 
responses, synovial GCs should play a crucial role in the breakdown of 
self-tolerance. We have identified factors critical for ectopic GCs, thereby 
transforming the synovial inflammatory process. Tissues with GCs produced 10- to 
20-fold higher amounts of the chemokines CXCL13 and CCL21. CXCL13 derived from 
three sources, endothelial cells, synovial fibroblasts, and FDC networks. The 
level of CXCL13 transcripts strongly predicted GCs; however, some tissues had 
high levels of CXCL13 but lacked GCs. Tissue expression of LT-beta emerged as a 
second key factor. LT-beta protein was detected on follicular center and mantle 
zone B cells. Multivariate regression analysis identified CXCL13 and LT-beta as 
the only cytokines predicting GCs. Remarkably, LT-alpha did not contribute 
independently. The contribution of B cells to ectopic lymphoid organogenesis was 
not limited to LT-beta production. Rather, synovial tissue B cells were critical 
in regulating T cell activation. In adoptive transfer experiments in human 
synovium-SCID mouse chimeras, activation of synovium-derived CD4 T cells was 
strictly dependent on T cell/B cell follicles. Depletion of synovial tissue B 
cells abrogated T cell function, and non-B cell antigen-presenting cells could 
not maintain T cell stimulation. Unexpectedly, GC function in the rheumatoid 
lesion was also dependent on CD8 T cells. The majority of T cell receptors 
derived from CD8 T cells were shared between distinct GCs. Depletion of CD8 T 
cells disrupted synovial GCs, FDC networks disappeared, and transcription of 
LT-beta, IgG, and Igkappa declined. Follicle-sustaining CD8 T cells were located 
at the edge of or within the mantle zone. Cell-cell communication in the mantle 
zone, including CD8 T cells, appears to be critical for ectopic GC formation in 
rheumatoid synovitis.
