CDP 571 [anti-TNF monoclonal antibody, BAY 103356, BAY W 3356, Humicade] is a 
recombinant humanised antibody directed against tumour necrosis factor (TNF). 
CDP 571 has an advantage over the mouse/human chimera anti-TNF-alpha antibody, 
nerelimomab, in that it is suitable for multiple dosing as it is not so 
immunogenic. Celltech constructed CDP 571 by grafting the section of mouse 
antibody that recognises TNF onto a human IgG4 antibody. In the third quarter of 
1999, Celltech merged with Chiroscience to form Celltech Chiroscience. In 
January 2000, Medeva was merged into Celltech Chiroscience, which was renamed as 
Celltech Group. The research division of Celltech Group is now called Celltech 
R&D (formerly Celltech Chiroscience Discovery) and the manufacturing and 
marketing division is called Celltech Pharmaceuticals (formerly Celltech Medeva 
Pharma). Celltech has completed two phase III trials, involving around 670 
patients with moderate-to-severe Crohn's disease; however, both these trials 
failed to meet their primary endpoints. Biogen and Celltech group will review 
the scope of their collaboration following additional analysis of the phase III 
data and discussions with regulatory authorities. The Celltech Group intends to 
devote significant resources towards enhancing the capability of Celltech 
Pharmaceuticals to market CDP 571 and other new drugs (such as CDP 860 and CDP 
870) as specialised hospital products. Phase II trials were underway in the 
United Kingdom for use of the drug in the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus. 
However, these trials have also been discontinued. Celltech Group is no longer 
developing CDP 571 for septic shock, based on negative results with the related 
compound nerelimomab. The compound was in phase III trials for septic shock in 
France, Belgium, the United Kingdom, Germany and the US. Celltech also plans to 
investigate the use of CDP 571 in psoriasis via a collaboration with Biogen 
(USA). In January 2002, AFX (Agence France-Presse and the Financial Times Group) 
reported that analysts at Morgan Stanley have forecast Humicade trade mark to 
reach sales of 250 million US dollars in 2008--at that time, the market value 
for anti-TNF products to treat rheumatoid arthritis and Crohn's disease will 
exceed 4 billion US dollars, according to Morgan Stanley.
