OBJECTIVE: To review the pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, efficacy, safety, and 
pharmacoeconomic impact of infliximab in the treatment of Crohn's disease (CD) 
and rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
DATA SOURCES: MEDLINE and Pre-MEDLINE (1966-June 2002) and manufacturer 
prescribing literature were employed to find English-language articles on 
infliximab. Additional studies and abstracts were identified from the 
bibliographies of reviewed literature and conference proceedings.
STUDY SELECTION/DATA EXTRACTION: All articles identified from data sources were 
evaluated, and all information deemed relevant was included in this review. 
Information regarding basic pharmacology was collected from studies in animals. 
Pharmacokinetic data were collected from human trials. Safety data were 
extracted from clinical trials and postmarketing surveillance. Priority was 
given to randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled studies for the assessment 
of efficacy. All available economic evaluations were included.
DATA SYNTHESIS: Infliximab is a new monoclonal antibody that appears to work by 
a unique mechanism: inhibiting the action of tumor necrosis factor-alpha 
(TNF-alpha). Infliximab is administered by intravenous infusion. In clinical 
trials in CD, infliximab significantly decreased the CD activity index compared 
with placebo in treatment-resistant disease and significantly reduced the number 
of draining fistulas in fistulizing disease. In RA, when infliximab was added to 
methotrexate (MTX), it resulted in a significant improvement in most disease 
outcome measures when compared with MTX plus placebo. Few major adverse effects 
were reported in the clinical trials; however, serious adverse events, including 
malignancy and demyelination, have been reported in postmarketing surveillance. 
Also, increased susceptibility to infections (including tuberculosis) has been 
reported.
CONCLUSIONS: Infliximab is an effective new agent for the treatment of CD and 
RA. Its apparent unique mechanism of action makes infliximab an important 
addition to therapy. Caution should be exercised when considering infliximab for 
individuals who have chronic or recurrent infections, mild congestive heart 
failure (New York Heart Association [NYHA] class I/II), nervous system 
disorders, or live or have lived in an area endemic for histoplasmosis. 
Infliximab is contraindicated for patients with a clinically important, active 
infection, moderate to severe congestive heart failure (NYHA class III/IV), or 
an allergy to mouse proteins or any of the ingredients in infliximab. Further 
long-term efficacy, safety, and economic data on infliximab are required. Also, 
for the treatment of RA, the burden of administering infliximab (as a 2-hour 
supervised infusion) has to be considered when choosing among anti-TNF-alpha 
medication (as the other 2 approved agents, etanercept and adalimumab, can be 
self-administered by subcutaneous injection).
