Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic debilitating disease estimated to afflict 
13% of the world population. Although palliative treatments (nonsteroidal 
antiinflammatory drugs or NSAIDs) are widely prescribed, there are currently 
only a few treatments that can modify the insidious progression of the disease 
(disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs or DMARDs), which frequently leads to 
physical incapacitation and, on occasion, death. Proinflammatory cytokines such 
as tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) and interleukin-1 beta (IL-1 beta) 
are implicated in the disease onset and in the progression of bone and joint 
destruction that characterizes chronic RA. p38 is an intracellular 
mitogen/stress-activated protein kinase (MAPK/SAPK) that regulates both the 
release and the actions of TNF-alpha and IL-1 beta. Inhibition of p38 kinase is 
thus an important potential target for novel DMARDs. Following the pioneering 
work conducted at SmithKline Beecham and elucidation of the roles of p38 with 
potent and selective inhibitors such as SB-203580, many pharmaceutical companies 
have embarked upon p38 synthetic programs, as indicated by the ever-increasing 
number of patents in this domain. At Aventis, a rapid parallel synthesis project 
led to the identification of RPR-200765A, a potent and selective p38 inhibitor 
of the lipopolysaccharide-induced release of TNF-alpha in vitro in mononuclear 
phagocytes and in vivo in the rat. It also reduces disease incidence and 
progression in the rat streptococcal cell wall arthritis model when administered 
orally in either a prophylactic or a therapeutic dosing regimen. Development of 
p38 inhibitors has been slow, probably because of toxicological problems, which 
might explain why only two oral p38 inhibitors, SB-242235 and VX-745, have 
advanced into clinical development. In the present article, the preclinical data 
exemplified in studies on RPR-200765A indicating why p38 inhibitors are 
attracting so much attention as potential novel anti-RA drugs are reviewed. 
Current information on the different structural classes of p38 inhibitors is 
presented and possible reasons for the delays in their development are 
critically discussed.
