OBJECTIVE: Antibodies directed to citrulline-containing proteins are highly 
specific for rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and can be detected in up to 80% of 
patients with RA. Citrulline is a nonstandard amino acid that can be 
incorporated into proteins only by posttranslational modification of arginine by 
peptidylarginine deiminase (PAD) enzymes. The objective of this study was to 
investigate the presence of anticitrulline antibodies, PAD enzymes, and 
citrullinated antigens in mouse models of both acute and chronic destructive 
arthritis: streptococcal cell wall (SCW)-induced arthritis and collagen-induced 
arthritis (CIA), respectively.
METHODS: Synovial tissue biopsy specimens were obtained from naive mice, mice 
with CIA, and mice with SCW-induced arthritis. The expression of messenger RNA 
(mRNA) for PAD enzymes was analyzed by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain 
reaction; the presence of PAD proteins and their products (citrullinated 
proteins) was analyzed by Western blotting and by immunolocalization. The 
presence of anticitrullinated protein antibodies was investigated by an 
anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (anti-CCP) enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
(ELISA) and an ELISA using in vitro citrullinated fibrinogen.
RESULTS: In both mouse models, PAD type 2 (PAD2) mRNA was present in the 
synovium but was not translated into PAD2 protein. In contrast, PAD4 mRNA, 
although absent from healthy synovium, was readily transcribed and translated by 
polymorphonuclear neutrophils infiltrating the synovial tissue during 
inflammation. As a consequence, several synovial proteins were subjected to 
citrullination. One of these proteins was identified as fibrin, which has been 
reported to be citrullinated also in synovium of patients with RA. Although 
generation of citrullinated antigens during synovial inflammation in the mice 
was eminent, no anti-CCP antibodies could be detected.
CONCLUSION: Citrullination of synovial antigens is an active process during 
joint inflammation in both mice and humans, but the induction of autoantibodies 
directed to these proteins is a more specific phenomenon, detectable only in 
human RA patients.
