OBJECTIVE: To study the immunologic function and determine the fine epitope 
structure of a synthetic peptide p135H ((2373)TTYKRRLQKRSSRHP) of the G3 domain 
of human cartilage proteoglycan (aggrecan), which contains a highly homologous 
sequence motif of the shared epitope (QKRAA), the most common sequence motif in 
HLA-DR4 alleles, which predispose humans to the development of rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA).
METHODS: Synthetic p135 peptides with altered sequences were used for 
(hyper)immunization of arthritis-susceptible BALB/c mice and then challenged 
with a single dose of cartilage proteoglycan. Human p135 (p135H) and mouse p135 
(p135M) synthetic peptides of the G3 domain of aggrecan were used to prime 
lymphocytes, which were then used for adoptive transfer of arthritis into 
"presensitized" SCID mice, determining cross-reactivity among p135 peptides and 
their analogous sequences, and generating T cell hybridomas. T cell hybridomas 
were also used for arthritis transfer into SCID mice and for characterizing the 
fine epitope structure of T cell receptor (TCR) and major histo-compatibility 
complex (MHC) binding sites of the immunogenic/arthritogenic p135H sequence.
RESULTS: While p135H peptide-(hyper)immunized mice became sensitized, they 
developed arthritis only after injection of a single dose of cartilage 
proteoglycan aggrecan. An altered peptide sequence (p135H-AA) carrying the 
shared epitope motif (QKRAA) was as effective as the natural peptide p135H 
sequence for inducing arthritis. Mouse p135M-specific lymphocytes induced 
arthritis with a lower incidence, but synthetic peptides to Escherichia coli 
heat-shock protein (DnaJ) or HLA-DR4 allele (both having the shared epitope 
sequence with different flanking regions) were also positive. Fine epitope 
sequence recognition of an arthritogenic T cell hybridoma derived from 
p135H-primed lymphocyte population was determined. Interestingly, in the most 
central position, a basic amino acid triplet of p135H peptide was found to be 
the MHC-binding motif, whereas the flanking amino acids bound to the TCR.
CONCLUSION: Peptide p135H, corresponding to the peptide sequence in the G3 
domain of human cartilage proteoglycan aggrecan, is immunogenic/arthritogenic in 
BALB/c mice. Peptide p135H includes a highly homologous motif of the shared 
epitope, a sequence that is overrepresented in bacterial heat-shock proteins, 
envelope protein of human JC polyomavirus, and numerous HLA-DR4 alleles. Since 
the G3 domain of cartilage proteoglycan aggrecan with the p135 sequence is 
"lost" during the normal metabolic turnover of cartilage proteoglycan or in 
pathologic conditions, an antigenoriented T cell migration into joints of 
presensitized (susceptible) individuals may contribute to the organ-specificity 
of RA.
