Oral tolerance (OT) consists of the oral administration of antigens (Ag) that 
could alter the response of the immune system. This is a form of peripheral 
immune tolerance in which mature lymphocytes in the peripheral lymphoid tissues 
are rendered non functional or hyporesponsive by prior oral administration of 
Ag. It was first described in 1911 in animal models of anaphylaxis. This 
therapeutic approach requires the orally administration of Ag and the active 
participation of the gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT), a tissue comprising 
Peyer's patches, intraepitelial cells and villi containing epithelials cells 
which is a well organized immune network. The mechanisms by which OT is mediated 
included deletion or anergy and active cellular suppression. The primary factor 
determining which form of tolerance will be developed after oral administration 
of Ag is the Ag dosage. Thus, it is thought that low doses of Ag induce the 
generation of active suppression, via regulatory T cells in the GALT, which then 
migrate to the systemic immune system. These regulatory T cells produce 
down-regulatory cytokines such as IL4, IL10 and TGFbeta, a Th2 / Th3 cytokine 
pattern. Conversely, high dose of Ag favors anergy or clonal deletion. The 
phenomenon in which regulatory cells, as generated by oral tolerization, are 
primed in an Ag specific manner, but act in the respective microenvironment in a 
non-Ag specific manner is called bystander suppression. This phenomenon is of 
particular interest and explained the use of OT in T cell mediated autoimmune 
diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis (RA), multiple sclerosis (MS) and type I 
diabetes, some diseases in which the autoAg remains unknown or where there are 
reactivities to multiple autoAgs. There were several studies demonstrating the 
effectiveness of orally administered Ag in different animal models of autoimmune 
diseases, such as experimental allergic encephalomyelitis, collagen induced 
arthritis, diabetes, but also uveitis, myastenia gravis and transplantation. 
These mouse or rat models of autoimmune diseases gave the rationale for the 
therapeutic use of OT in human and this therapeutic approach has been tried in 
MS and RA, using oral myelin or oral collagen, respectively. In RA, 4 trials of 
oral type II collagen (CII) in RA have been published. Taken together, these 
studies suggested that oral CII in RA gave a trend toward clinical improvement, 
with significance in only 2 studies. Bacterial extract from Escherichia coli 
containing heat shock proteins has been tried in oral treatment for RA. Two 
placebo controlled trials and 2 comparative studies gave favorable results for 
this bacterial extract with no or mild adverse events. Although oral/mucosal 
tolerance has given successful results in animal models of autoimmune diseases, 
the enthusiasm for this therapeutic approach in human diseases must be tempered. 
The discrepancies between the effectiveness of OT in animal models and the 
results in human trials raise some questions, the identification of the subgroup 
of patients who might respond to this treatment and the source (or nature) of 
the administered Ag (homologous versus heterologous), for instance.
