The objective of the study was to determine the diagnostic value for rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA) of anti-filaggrin autoantibodies (autoAb) recognizing 
citrullinated recombinant rat filaggrin (ACRF) in community cases of very early 
arthritis. To evaluate the diagnostic value of ACRF, were studied sera from 
patients with different classified rheumatic diseases and healthy subjects 
(group 1, n= 422) and 314 community cases of very early arthritis (group 2) that 
were classified as RA (n = 176), non-RA (n = 63) and undifferentiated (n = 75) 
arthritides after 1 years of follow-up. ACRF were measured using a new ELISA, 
with results expressed as the difference between the OD value obtained on 
citrullinated minus that on noncitrullinated rat filaggrin (differential ACRF; 
dACRF). For both groups, rheumatoid factors (RF), anti-keratin autoAb (AKA) and 
anti-perinuclear factor (APF) were tested; for group 2, anti-CCP autoAb were 
also tested. Different reactivity patterns against citrullinated and 
noncitrullinated filaggrin were observed. Almost all sera reacting with 
citrullinated but not noncitrullinated filaggrin were from RA patients. Among RA 
and non-RA sera that recognized both forms of filaggrin, a positive result was 
obtained only with RA sera. For groups 1 and 2, dACRF sensitivity was 58.4% and 
30.7%, and specificity for RA was 99.5% and 98.4%, respectively. In group 2, 
dACRF specificity for RA was better than that of RF (92.1%), APF (95.2%), AKA 
(96.8%) and anti-CCP (95.2%). dACRF positive predictive value was high (98.2) 
and close to that given by the concomitant positivity of RF and anti-CCP autoAb. 
Despite a high positive correlation between AKA, APF, anti-CCP and dACRF test 
results, they were complementary since some sera were positive for only one 
test. Thus, in a community setting, anti-citrullinated rat filaggrin reactivity 
detected by a new ELISA, whose originality is based on the difference between 
serum's reactivities on the citrullinated and native forms of filaggrin, had a 
higher diagnostic value for RA than other autoAb.
