OBJECTIVE: To determine the role and expression of the cytokine/receptor pair 
interleukin-21 (IL-21)/IL-21 receptor (IL-21R) in rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
METHODS: The expression of IL-21R and IL-21 was analyzed by TaqMan real-time 
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and in situ hybridization of synovial biopsy 
samples from patients with RA and osteoarthritis (OA). Double labeling by 
immunohistochemistry after in situ hybridization was performed with anti-CD68 
antibodies. The expression of IL-21R at the protein level was confirmed by 
Western blotting. Stimulation experiments were performed with recombinant 
IL-1beta, tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha), platelet-derived growth factor 
(PDGF), and transforming growth factor beta (TGFbeta). The role of IL-21R in 
cartilage destruction was analyzed in the SCID mouse coimplantation model of RA.
RESULTS: IL-21R was found in total RNA extracts and in synovial biopsy samples 
from RA patients, whereas no expression or only minimal expression was seen in 
samples from OA patients. Double labeling indicated that both synovial 
macrophages and synovial fibroblasts expressed IL-21R. Western blotting with 
anti-IL-21R antibodies confirmed the expression of IL-21R protein in RA synovial 
fibroblasts (RASFs). Of note, IL-21 was not detectable by real-time PCR and in 
situ hybridization in the same samples in vivo as in vitro. The level of 
expression of IL-21R messenger RNA (mRNA) was not altered by stimulation with 
IL-1beta, TNFalpha, PDGF, or TGFbeta. Interestingly, in the SCID mouse 
coimplantation model, RASFs did not maintain their expression of IL-21R at sites 
of invasion into the cartilage. Similarly, IL-21R mRNA was not expressed at 
sites of invasion into cartilage and bone in RA synovium.
CONCLUSION: Our data demonstrate that IL-21R is expressed in RA synovium by 
RASFs and synovial macrophages. IL-21R is associated with the activated 
phenotype of RASFs independently of the major proinflammatory cytokines IL-1beta 
and TNFalpha, but correlates negatively with the destruction of articular 
cartilage and bone.
