In the rat model of rheumatoid arthritis, a marked formation of osteoclasts is 
found in the distal tibia and the metatarsal bone. It was therefore postulated 
that osteoclast progenitors would be increased in the bone marrow cavities of 
rats with adjuvant-induced arthritis (AA rats). Bone marrow cells obtained from 
tibia of AA rats were cultured to form cells in the osteoclast lineage to access 
the number of osteoclast progenitors. Unexpectedly, only a suppressed level of 
osteoclast progenitors was detected in the diaphyseal bone marrow of tibia in AA 
rats. Distribution of osteoclast progenitors in the bone marrow cavity was 
examined, and it was shown that osteoclast progenitors accumulated in the distal 
tibia. Macrophage inflammatory protein (MIP)-1alpha, an osteoclastogenic CC 
chemokine, was expressed in ED-1-positive macrophages localizing in the distal 
tibia with marked bone destruction. Chemotaxis studies showed that MIP-1alpha 
expressed significant activity towards bone marrow cells. The suppressed level 
of osteoclastogenesis in bone marrow cells of AA rats was restored to a normal 
level by the addition of MIP-1alpha. It was suggested that MIP-1alpha is 
involved in the migration of osteoclast progenitors to the distal tibia as well 
as in osteoclastogenesis in AA rats. In these rats, in situ hybridization of the 
distal tibia with a high level of bone destruction showed significant expression 
of Receptor activator nuclear factor kappaB ligand (RANKL) messenger RNA in 
aggregates of multinucleated osteoclast-like cells present in the bone marrow 
cavity, a unique pathological feature for these rats. Migrated osteoclast 
progenitors are thought to be efficiently differentiated into osteoclasts in 
response to RANKL expressed by the aggregates of osteoclast-like cells under the 
influence of the MIP-1alpha. Such positive-feedback regulation of 
osteoclastogenesis could result in the highest recruitment of active osteoclasts 
in the area of marked bone destruction.
