A wide range of environmental stress and human disorders involves inappropriate 
regulation of NF-kappaB, including cancers and numerous inflammatory conditions. 
We have developed transgenic mice that express luciferase under the control of 
NF-kappaB, enabling real-time non-invasive imaging of NF-kappaB activity in 
intact animals. We show that, in the absence of stimulation, strong, intrinsic 
luminescence is evident in lymph nodes in the neck region, thymus, and Peyer's 
patches. Treating mice with stressors, such as TNF-alpha, IL-1alpha, or 
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) increases the luminescence in a tissue-specific manner, 
with the strongest activity observable in the skin, lungs, spleen, Peyer's 
patches, and the wall of the small intestine. Liver, kidney, heart, muscle, and 
adipose tissue exhibit less intense activities. Exposure of the skin to a low 
dose of UV-B radiation increases luminescence in the exposed areas. In ocular 
experiments, LPS- and TNF-alpha injected NF-kappaB-luciferase transgenic mice 
exhibit a 20-40-fold increase in lens NF-kappaB activity, similar to other LPS- 
and TNF-alpha-responsive organs. Peak NF-kappaB activity occurs 6h after 
injection of TNF-alpha and 12h after injection of LPS. Peak activities occur, 
respectively, 3 and 6h later than that in other tissues. Mice exposed to 
360J/m(2) of UV-B exhibit a 16-fold increase in NF-kappaB activity 6h after 
exposure, characteristically similar to TNF-alpha-exposed mice. Thus, in 
NF-kappaB-luciferase transgenic mice, NF-kappaB activity also occurs in lens 
epithelial tissue and is activated when the intact mouse is exposed to classical 
stressors. Furthermore, as revealed by real-time non-invasive imaging, induction 
of chronic inflammation resembling rheumatoid arthritis produces strong 
NF-kappaB activity in the affected joints. Finally, we have used the model to 
demonstrate NF-kappaB regulation by manipulating the Vitamin A status in mice. 
NF-kappaB activity is elevated in mice fed a Vitamin A deficient (VAD) diet, and 
suppressed by surplus doses of retinoic acid (RA). We thus demonstrate the 
development and use of a versatile model for monitoring NF-kappaB activation 
both in tissue homogenates and in intact animals after the use of classical 
activators, during disease progression and after dietary intervention.
