We hypothesized that pro-inflammatory cytokines can act locally in the growth 
plate to impair longitudinal growth. In a model of cultured fetal rat metatarsal 
bones, we found that IL-1beta and TNF-alpha act in synergy to inhibit 
longitudinal growth, an effect linked to decreased proliferation and increased 
apoptosis of growth plate chondrocytes. IGF-I could partially reverse all these 
effects.
INTRODUCTION: Children with chronic inflammatory conditions, such as Crohn's 
disease or rheumatoid arthritis, experience impaired longitudinal growth. The 
inflammatory process itself, which includes upregulation of the pro-inflammatory 
cytokines interleukin (IL)-1beta, IL-6, and TNF-alpha, is believed to be at 
least partly responsible for the poor growth in these patients. This study aimed 
to clarify whether these cytokines can act locally in the growth plate to 
suppress longitudinal growth and whether any negative effects can be reversed by 
insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The effects of cytokines on longitudinal bone growth were 
studied in fetal (day E20) rat metatarsal bones kept in culture. After a 7-day 
culture, the bones were sectioned, and chondrocyte proliferation was assessed by 
bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporation and apoptosis by TUNEL.
RESULTS: When added separately, IL-1beta and TNF-alpha impaired longitudinal 
bone growth only at a high concentration (100 ng/ml each; p < 0.05 versus 
control). In contrast, when added in combination, IL-1beta and TNF-alpha 
potently inhibited growth at far lower concentrations (from 3 ng/ml each; p < 
0.001 versus control) and also decreased chondrocyte proliferation and increased 
apoptosis. Growth failure induced by the combination of IL-1beta and TNF-alpha 
(10 ng/ml each) could be counteracted by anti-IL-1beta (100 ng/ml; p < 0.001), 
anti-TNF-alpha (100 ng/ml; p < 0.001), or IGF-I (100 ng/ml; p < 0.01). IL-6 did 
not affect longitudinal growth even when added in combination with IL-1beta or 
TNF-alpha (10 ng/ml each).
CONCLUSIONS: We show that IL-1beta and TNF-alpha act in synergy to locally 
suppress longitudinal growth, an effect that can be partially reversed by IGF-I. 
Although growth hormone (GH)/IGF-I may improve longitudinal growth in children 
with chronic inflammatory diseases, our results suggest that the inflammatory 
process itself must be targeted to achieve normal growth.
