The proliferation inhibitor of the macrolide class, everolimus, is a drug shown 
to be effective in the prevention of organ transplant rejection and to have a 
potential in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis and certain cancers. As these 
diseases or their current treatments are associated with bone loss, we examined 
the effect of everolimus on mouse and human bone cells in vitro and on bone in 
an ovariectomized (OVX) rat model. Everolimus potently inhibited primary mouse 
and human osteoclast activity in the pit assay (IC50 values of 0.6-4.0 nM), as 
well as osteoclast formation, measured as the number of tartrate-resistant acid 
phosphatase (TRAP) multinucleated cells (IC50 values of 7.7-10.5 nM). Inhibition 
of osteoblastic differentiation was also observed (IC50 value of 13.5 nM). As 
expected, everolimus inhibited proliferation of osteoclast precursors and 
stimulated apoptosis, albeit with insufficient potency and efficacy to explain 
inhibition of osteoclast activity. Thus, everolimus appeared to directly inhibit 
bone resorption, which is in accord with the detected inhibition of mRNA and 
protein expression of cathepsin K; the main collagen-degrading protease in 
osteoclasts. Despite the in vitro antiproliferative activity of everolimus and 
the observed inhibition of osteoblast differentiation, no detrimental effects 
were detected at different skeletal sites in mature OVX rats at doses up to 3 
mg/kg/day. This everolimus dose also prevented the OVX-induced loss of 
cancellous bone by 60%, an effect predominantly associated with decreased 
osteoclast-mediated bone resorption, resulting in a partial preservation of the 
cancellous bone network. Everolimus inhibited S6 kinase 1 activity in rat blood 
cells, skin, and bone, at doses equivalent to those used for efficacy 
experiments in the OVX rat model, which demonstrated in vivo targeting of the 
expected molecular pathway. In conclusion, everolimus directly inhibits bone 
resorption by osteoclasts and thus could at least be neutral or protective for 
bone in vivo, which would favor its use in disease indications associated with 
bone loss.
