Rheumatoid arthritis is characterised by the interaction of multiple mediators, 
among the most important of which are cytokines. In recent years, extensive data 
demonstrates a pivotal role for one cytokine, macrophage migration inhibitory 
factor (MIF), in fundamental events in innate and adaptive immunity. MIF has now 
been demonstrated to be involved in the pathogenesis of many diseases, but in 
the case of RA the evidence for a role of MIF is very strong. MIF is abundantly 
expressed in the serum of RA patients, and in RA synovial tissue where it 
correlates with disease activity. MIF induces synoviocyte expression of key 
proinflammatory genes including TNF, IL-1, IL-6, IL-8, cPLA2, COX2 and MMPs. MIF 
also regulates the function of endothelial cells and B cells. Moreover, MIF is 
implicated in the control of synoviocyte proliferation and apoptosis via direct 
effects on the expression of the tumor suppressor protein p53. In multiple rat 
and mouse models of RA, anti-MIF antibodies or genetic MIF deficiency are 
associated with significant inhibition of disease. MIF -/- mice further 
demonstrate increases in synovial apoptosis. That the human Mif gene is encoded 
by different functional alleles in subjects with inflammatory disease also 
provides evidence for the role of MIF in RA. The mechanism of action of MIF is 
becoming better understood. MIF appears to interact with cell surface CD74, with 
consequent activation of MAP kinases but possibly not NFkappaB intracellular 
signal transduction. This apparent selectivity may be implicated in the ability 
of MIF to antagonise the effects of glucocorticoids. As MIF expression is 
induced by glucocorticoids, inhibition of its antagonistic effects may permit 
enhanced therapeutic effect of glucocorticoids, or "steroid sparing". To date 
there are no clinical trials of MIF antagonism in any disease, but exploitation 
of antibody, soluble receptor, or small molecule approaches enabled by the 
unique crystal structure of MIF, may soon lead to the ability to test in the 
clinic the importance of this cytokine in human RA.
