Chronic inflammation is associated with a broad spectrum of neurodegenerative 
diseases of aging. Included are such disorders as Alzheimer's disease (AD), 
Parkinson's disease (PD), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, the Parkinson-dementia 
complex of Guam, all of the tauopathies, and age-related macular degeneration. 
Also included are such peripheral conditions as osteoarthritis, rheumatoid 
arthritis, atherosclerosis, and myocardial infarction. Inflammation is a 
two-edged sword. In acute situations, or at low levels, it deals with the 
abnormality and promotes healing. When chronically sustained at high levels, it 
can seriously damage viable host tissue. We describe this latter phenomenon as 
autotoxicity to distinguish it from autoimmunity. The latter involves a 
lymphocyte-directed attack against self proteins. Autotoxicity, on the other 
hand, is determined by the concentration and degree of activation of 
tissue-based monocytic phagocytes. Microglial cells are the brain 
representatives of the monocyte phagocytic system. Biochemically, the intensity 
of their activation is related to a spectrum of inflammatory mediators generated 
by a variety of local cells. The known spectrum includes, but is not limited to, 
prostaglandins, pentraxins, complement components, anaphylotoxins, cytokines, 
chemokines, proteases, protease inhibitors, adhesion molecules, and free 
radicals. This spectrum offers a huge variety of targets for new 
anti-inflammatory agents. It has been suggested, largely on the basis of 
transgenic mouse models, that stimulating inflammation rather than inhibiting it 
can be beneficial in such diseases as AD. If this were the case, administration 
of NSAIDs, or other anti-inflammatory drugs, would be expected to exacerbate 
conditions such as AD, PD, and atherosclerosis. However, epidemiological 
evidence overwhelmingly demonstrates that the reverse is true. This indicates 
that, at least in these diseases, the inflammation is harmful. So far, advantage 
has not been taken of opportunities indicated by these epidemiological studies 
to treat AD and PD with appropriate anti-inflammatory agents. Based on this 
evidence, classical NSAIDs are the most logical choice. Dosage, though, must be 
sufficient to combat the inflammation. Analysis of mRNA levels of inflammatory 
mediators indicates that the intensity of inflammation is considerably higher in 
AD hippocampus and in PD substantia nigra than in osteoarthritic joints. Thus, 
full therapeutic doses of NSAIDs, or combinations of anti-inflammatory agents, 
are needed to achieve the suggested neurological benefits.
