(-)-DHMEQ, a newly designed NF-kappaB inhibitor, inhibited RANKL-induced 
osteoclast differentiation in mouse BMMs through downregulation of the induction 
of NFATc1, an essential transcription factor of osteoclastogenesis.
INTRODUCTION: Bone destruction is often observed in advanced case of rheumatoid 
arthritis and neoplastic diseases, including multiple myeloma. Effective and 
nontoxic chemotherapeutic agents are expected for the suppression of these bone 
destructions. RANKL induces activation of NF-kappaB and osteoclastogenesis in 
bone marrow-derived monocyte/macrophage precursor cells (BMMs). Targeted 
disruption or pharmacological suppression of NF-kappaB result in impaired 
osteoclastogenesis, but how NF-kappaB is involved in the regulation of 
osteoclastogenesis is not known.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The effect of (-)-dehydroxymethylepoxyquinomicin 
[(-)-DHMEQ] on osteoclast differentiation was studied using a culture system of 
mouse BMMs stimulated with RANKL and macrophage colony-stimulating factor. The 
mechanism of the inhibition was studied by biochemical analysis such as 
immunoblotting and retroviral transfer experiments.
RESULTS: (-)-DHMEQ strongly inhibited RANKL-induced NF-kappaB activation in BMMs 
and inhibited RANKL-induced formation of TRACP(+) multinucleated cells. 
Interestingly, (-)-DHMEQ specifically inhibited the RANKL-induced expression of 
NFATc1 but not the expressions of TRAF6 or c-fos. Inhibition of osteoclast 
differentiation by (-)-DHMEQ was rescued by overexpression of NFATc1, suggesting 
that the inhibition is not caused by a toxic effect. Moreover, pit formation 
assays showed that (-)-DHMEQ also inhibited the bone-resorbing activity of 
mature osteoclasts.
CONCLUSION: The inhibition of NF-kappaB suppresses osteoclastogenesis by 
downregulation of NFATc1, suggesting that NFATc1 expression is regulated by 
NF-kappaB in RANKL-induced osteoclastogenesis. Our results also indicate the 
possibility of (-)-DHMEQ becoming a new therapeutic strategy against bone 
erosion.
