To assess the potential use of hyaluronic acid (HA) as adjuvant therapy in 
rheumatoid arthritis, the anti-inflammatory and chondroprotective effects of HA 
were analysed in experimental rat antigen-induced arthritis (AIA). Lewis rats 
with AIA were subjected to short-term (days 1 and 8, n = 10) or long-term (days 
1, 8, 15 and 22, n = 10) intra-articular treatment with microbially 
manufactured, high-molecular-weight HA (molecular weight, 1.7 x 10(6) Da; 0.5 
mg/dose). In both tests, 10 buffer-treated AIA rats served as arthritic controls 
and six healthy animals served as normal controls. Arthritis was monitored by 
weekly assessment of joint swelling and histological evaluation in the 
short-term test (day 8) and in the long-term test (day 29). Safranin O staining 
was employed to detect proteoglycan loss from the epiphyseal growth plate and 
the articular cartilage of the arthritic knee joint. Serum levels of IL-6, 
tumour necrosis factor alpha and glycosaminoglycans were measured by ELISA/kit 
systems (days 8 and 29). HA treatment did not significantly influence AIA in the 
short-term test (days 1 and 8) but did suppress early chronic AIA (day 15, P < 
0.05); however, HA treatment tended to aggravate chronic AIA in the long-term 
test (day 29). HA completely prevented proteoglycan loss from the epiphyseal 
growth plate and articular cartilage on day 8, but induced proteoglycan loss 
from the epiphyseal growth plate on day 29. Similarly, HA inhibited the 
histological signs of acute inflammation and cartilage damage in the short-term 
test, but augmented acute and chronic inflammation as well as cartilage damage 
in the long-term test. Serum levels of IL-6, tumour necrosis factor alpha, and 
glycosaminoglycans were not influenced by HA. Local therapeutic effects of HA in 
AIA are clearly biphasic, with inhibition of inflammation and cartilage damage 
in the early chronic phase but with promotion of joint swelling, inflammation 
and cartilage damage in the late chronic phase.
