Rat models are frequently used for finding genes contributing to the arthritis 
phenotype. In most studies, however, limitations in the number of animals result 
in a low resolution. As a result, the linkage between the autoimmune 
experimental arthritis phenotype and the genomic region, that is, the 
quantitative trait locus, can cover several hundred genes. The purpose of this 
work was to facilitate the search for candidate genes in such regions by 
introducing a web tool called Candidate Gene Capture (CGC) that takes advantage 
of free text data on gene function. The CGC tool was developed by combining 
genomic regions in the rat, associated with the autoimmune experimental 
arthritis phenotype, with rat/human gene homology data, and with descriptions of 
phenotypic gene effects and selected keywords. Each keyword was assigned a 
value, which was used for ranking genes based on their description of phenotypic 
gene effects. The application was implemented as a web-based tool and made 
public at http://ratmap.org/cgc. The CGC application ranks gene candidates for 
37 rat genomic regions associated with autoimmune experimental arthritis 
phenotypes. To evaluate the CGC tool, the gene ranking in four regions was 
compared with an independent manual evaluation. In these sample tests, there was 
a full agreement between the manual ranking and the CGC ranking for the four 
highest-ranked genes in each test, except for one single gene. This indicates 
that the CGC tool creates a ranking very similar to that made by human 
inspection. The exceptional gene, which was ranked as a gene candidate by the 
CGC tool but not in the manual evaluation, was found to be closely associated 
with rheumatoid arthritis in additional literature studies. Genes ranked by the 
CGC tools as less likely gene candidates, as well as genes ranked low, were 
generally rated in a similar manner to those done manually. Thus, to find genes 
contributing to experimentally induced arthritis, we consider the CGC 
application to be a helpful tool in facilitating the evaluation of large amounts 
of textual information.
