OBJECTIVE: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a systemic autoimmune inflammatory 
disease involving the breakdown of cartilage and juxta-articular bone, which is 
often accompanied by decreased bone mineral density (BMD) and increased risk of 
fracture. Anti-inflammatory omega-3 fatty acids may prevent arthritis and bone 
loss in MRL/lpr mice model of arthritis and in humans.
METHODS: In this study, the effect of long term feeding of 10% dietary n-3 (fish 
oil (FO)) and n-6 (corn oil (CO)) fatty acids begun at 6 weeks of age on bone 
mineral density (BMD) in different bone regions in an MRL/lpr female mouse model 
of RA was measured at 6, 9, and 12 months of age by dual energy x-ray 
absorptiometry (DEXA). After sacrificing the mice at 12 months of age, 
antioxidant enzyme activities were measured in spleen, mRNA for receptor 
activator of NF-kappaB ligand (RANKL) and osteoprotegerin (OPG) was measured by 
RT-PCR in lymph nodes, and synovitis was measured in leg joints.
RESULTS: At 6, 9 and 12 months of age, BMD was significantly higher (p < 0.05) 
in distal femur, proximal tibia, and lumbar spine of FO fed mice than those of 
CO fed mice. Spleen catalase (CAT) and superoxide dismutase (SOD) activities 
were also significantly higher (p < 0.01) in FO fed mice than in CO fed mice. 
Histology of knee joints revealed mild synovitis in CO fed mice, which was not 
present in FO fed mice. RT-PCR analysis of lymph nodes revealed decreased RANKL 
mRNA (p < 0.001) expression and enhanced OPG mRNA expression (p < 0.01) in FO 
fed mice compared to CO fed mice.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest beneficial effects of long-term FO feeding in 
maintaining higher BMD and lower synovitis in this mouse model. These beneficial 
effects may be due, in part, to increased activity of antioxidant enzymes, 
decreased expression of RANKL, and increased expression of OPG in FO fed mice 
thereby altering the RANKL/OPG ratio. These significant beneficial effects on 
BMD suggest that FO may serve as an effective dietary supplement to prevent BMD 
loss in patients with RA.
