OBJECTIVE: CC chemokines and their receptors play a fundamental role in 
trafficking and activation of leukocytes at sites of inflammation, contributing 
to joint damage in rheumatoid arthritis. Met-RANTES, an amino-terminal-modified 
methionylated form of RANTES (CCL5), antagonizes the binding of the chemokines 
RANTES and macrophage inflammatory protein 1alpha (MIP-1alpha; CCL3) to their 
receptors CCR1 and CCR5, respectively. The aim of this study was to investigate 
whether Met-RANTES could ameliorate adjuvant-induced arthritis (AIA) in the rat.
METHODS: Using immunohistochemistry, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, 
real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction, Western blot 
analysis, adoptive transfer, and chemotaxis, we defined joint inflammation, bony 
destruction, neutrophil and macrophage migration, Met-RANTES binding affinity to 
rat receptors, proinflammatory cytokine and bone marker levels, CCR1 and CCR5 
expression and activation, and macrophage homing into joints with AIA.
RESULTS: Administration of Met-RANTES as a preventative reduced the severity of 
joint inflammation. Administration of Met-RANTES to ankles with AIA showed 
decreases in inflammation, radiographic soft tissue swelling, and bone erosion. 
Met-RANTES significantly reduced the number of neutrophils and macrophages at 
the peak of arthritis compared with saline-injected controls. Competitive 
chemotaxis in peripheral blood mononuclear cells demonstrated that Met-RANTES 
inhibited MIP-1alpha and MIP-1beta at 50% inhibition concentrations of 5 nM and 
2 nM, respectively. Furthermore, levels of tumor necrosis factor alpha, 
interleukin-1beta, macrophage colony-stimulating factor, and RANKL were 
decreased in joints with AIA in the Met-RANTES group compared with the control 
group. Interestingly, the expression and activation of CCR1 and CCR5 in the 
joint were down-regulated in the Met-RANTES group compared with the control 
group. Functionally, Met-RANTES administration decreased adoptively transferred 
peritoneal macrophage homing into the joint.
CONCLUSION: The data suggest that the targeting of Th1-associated chemokine 
receptors reduce joint inflammation, bone destruction, and cell recruitment into 
joints with AIA.
