PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Heterogeneity in clinical presentation and disease course has 
hindered understanding of disease mechanisms in psoriatic arthritis, but recent 
studies have provided insights into pathogenesis. This review examines relevant 
animal models and genetic factors implicated in disease susceptibility. Also, 
recent reports on mechanisms related to synovial and entheseal inflammation are 
discussed.
RECENT FINDINGS: Two transgenic mouse models (amphiregulin, STAT-3) were 
reported that have features of psoriatic arthritis and psoriasis respectively. 
Genetic studies did not find associations between psoriatic arthritis and 
several class I major histocompatibility complex alleles, the caspase-activating 
recruitment domain 15 domain, or the major histocompatibility complex class I 
chain-related gene A9 allele, in sharp contrast to previous reports. The 
striking association of psoriatic arthritis with mutations in the killer 
immunoglobulin receptors on natural killer cells is particularly exciting but 
needs further study. Psoriatic arthritis has histopathologic features that are 
more characteristic of other forms of spondyloarthritis than rheumatoid 
arthritis. Moreover, several of these features correlate with clinical disease 
activity. Matrix metalloproteinases are strongly expressed in psoriatic 
arthritis synovium, and serum matrix metalloproteinases-3 may be a reliable 
biomarker for monitoring disease response. Finally, the concept of an 'enthesis 
organ' may explain the magnetic resonance imaging findings and clinical signs of 
psoriatic enthesitis and dactylitis.
SUMMARY: Recent findings highlight the importance of innate immune mechanisms in 
disease pathogenesis. Moreover, psoriatic arthritis and rheumatoid arthritis 
synovium have divergent histopathologic features that indicate distinct disease 
mechanisms. The generation of appropriate animal models coupled with reliable 
biomarkers will result in a deeper understanding of disease pathogenesis and 
will facilitate the identification of new therapeutic targets.
