Human tumor necrosis factor alpha (hTNF-alpha) is one of the most important 
inflammatory cytokines that acts as a mediator in inflammatory and immune 
response and plays a key role in host defense against infection. The over 
expression of hTNF-alpha is associated with serious consequences, such as shock, 
hypotension, thrombus, septicemia and even death. It has been implicated in many 
autoimmune and inflammatory diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis, Crohn's 
disease, chronic heart failure and septic shock. Inhibiting the bio-activity of 
hTNF-alpha is one of the strategy for the treatment of these diseases. Compared 
with traditional recombinant protein drugs, small molecule drugs have many 
advantages, such as high affinity, low immunogenecity and low cost. Systematic 
evolution of ligands by exponential enrichment (SELEX) is a powerful method for 
the selection of oligonucleotides that bind with high affinity and specificity 
to target proteins. Such oligonucleotides are called aptamers, and are potential 
therapeutics for blocking the activity of pathologically relevant proteins. To 
obtain oligonucleotide aptamers specifically binding to TNF, a 40nt random DNA 
combinatorial library flanked by 31nt fixed sequences was chemically 
synthesized. The random library was amplified with PCR and subjected to 
selection by SELEX protocol against hTNFalpha. After incubation of the library 
with hTNFalpha, the mixture was blotted onto Immobilon-NC transfer membrane. The 
no-specific binding was washed away and the hTNFa binding aptamers were eluted 
and detached from the target protein. The eluted oligo nucleotides were 
amplified with PCR and served as the DNA library for the next round selection. 
After 12 rounds of such selection, the selected aptamers were cloned to pGEM-T 
vector. Positive clones were identified by restriction enzyme digestion and DNA 
sequencing. Oligo DNA were synthesized according to the sequence data and tested 
for their activities. Binding activity of the aptamers to hTNFalpha were 
detected by ELISA and dot blot with biotin-streptavidin-horseradish peroxidase 
system. Mouse L929 cells were used to test the anti-hTNFa activity of the DNA 
aptamers. The aptamers were incubated with hTNFalpha and added to the L929 
cells. The results were read under microscope and with MTT staining. It was 
shown that these DNA aptamers bound to hTNFalpha with high affinity, and can 
inhibit the cytotoxicity of hTNFalpha on cell culture. The affinity of these 
aptamers are different and may related to their structure. These ssDNA aptamers 
are potential for the treatment and diagnosis of hTNFalpha related diseases.
