We evaluated the association of anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (CCP) antibody 
titers with serological markers of disease activity. We also compared three 
different anti-CCP antibody ELISAs with an anti-citrullin ELISA and the IgM and 
the IgA rheumatoid factor (RF) in their performance of discriminating between 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and other rheumatic diseases. Sera from 333 
consecutive patients of the Rheumaeinheit der Medizinischen Poliklinik Munchen, 
an outpatient clinic for rheumatic diseases, were collected and tested. Anti-CCP 
antibodies were assayed with three different commercially available ELISAs. 
Antifilaggrin antibodies were tested with a commercially available ELISA using 
in vitro deiminated recombinant rat filaggrin. IgA-RF was analyzed with an 
ELISA, whereas IgM-RF was measured by latex-enhanced turbidimetry. Rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA) was diagnosed in 87 patients according to the revised 
classification criteria of the American College of Rheumatology (ACR), probable 
RA was diagnosed in 23 patients in an early phase not (yet) fulfilling the ACR 
criteria, and 223 patients had other rheumatic diseases. Differences in 
sensitivity and specificity were calculated using McNemar's test. A measure of 
agreement (kappa statistic) was used to examine whether the tests tended to 
identify the same patients as positive or negative. Correlations between CCP 
titers and other tests were analyzed by Spearman nonparametric rank correlation. 
No significant differences in sensitivity and specificity were found between the 
tested CCP assays (80.0-80.9% and 97.3-98.1%, respectively). All three CCP tests 
were slightly but not significantly more sensitive and specific than the 
anti-citrullin assay (77% and 92%, respectively), comparably sensitive but 
significantly more specific compared with the IgM-RF (86% and 82%, 
respectively), and significantly more sensitive but comparably specific compared 
with the IgA-RF (63% and 94.4%, respectively) in detecting the patients with RA. 
There was no significant correlation between anti-CCP, anti-citrullin, or IgM-RF 
or IgA-RF antibody titers and C-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation 
rate, or white blood cell count. A weak but significant linear correlation was 
found between anti-CCP titers and IgM-RF titers (r = 0.2, P = 0.03). We could 
not find a significant difference between the three tested anti-CCP assays and 
the anti-citrullin test in terms of sensitivity and specificity. Compared with 
the IgM-RF, all the anti-CCP assays were superior in specificity and comparable 
in sensitivity. Compared with the IgA-RF, they were more sensitive and 
comparably specific in the discrimination of patients with RA from other 
rheumatic diseases. No correlation of any tested autoantibody titer with 
serological parameters of inflammation was found.
