Recently, mouse models for latent (LTB) and slowly progressive primary 
tuberculosis (SPTB) have been established. However, cytokine profiles during the 
two models are not well established. Using quantitative reverse 
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) we studied the expression 
levels of interleukin (IL)-2, IL-4, IL-10, IL-12, IL-15, interferon (IFN)-gamma 
and tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha during the course of LTB and SPTB in the 
lungs and spleens of B6D2F1Bom mice infected with the H37Rv strain of 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb). The results show that, except for IL-4, 
cytokine expression levels were significantly higher during SPTB than LTB in 
both the lungs and spleens. During LTB, all the cytokines (except IL-2 in the 
lungs) had higher expression levels during the initial period of infection both 
in the lungs and spleens. During SPTB, the expression levels of IL-15 increased 
significantly from phases 1 to 3 in the lungs. The expression levels of IL-10, 
IL-12 and IFN-gamma increased significantly from 2 to 3 in the lungs. IL-10 and 
IL-15 increased significantly from phases 2 to 3, whereas that of TNF-alpha 
decreased significantly and progressively from phases 1 to 3 in the spleens. 
Over-expression of proinflammatory cytokines during active disease has been well 
documented, but factor(s) underlying such over-expression is not known. In the 
present study, there was a progressive and significant increase in the 
expression levels of IL-15, together with Th1 cytokines (IL-12 and IFN-gamma) 
during SPTB but a significant decrease during LTB. IL-15 is known to up-regulate 
the production of proinflammatory cytokines, IL-1beta, IL-8, IL-12, IL-17, 
IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha and has an inhibitory effect on activation-induced cell 
death. IL-15 is known to be involved in many proinflammatory disease states such 
as rheumatoid arthritis, sarcoidosis, inflammatory bowel diseases, autoimmune 
diabetes, etc. Our results, together with the above observations, suggest that 
IL-15 may play an important role in mediating active disease during Mtb 
infection.
