BACKGROUND: Adalimumab is a fully human monoclonal antibody to tumor necrosis 
factor (TNF), which was recently introduced as a therapy for Crohn's disease and 
rheumatoid arthritis. Besides neutralization, induction of apoptosis of 
monocytes/macrophages and T cells is thought to be an important mechanism of 
action of the anti-tumor necrosis factor monoclonal antibody infliximab, at 
least in Crohn's disease therapy.
AIM: To study caspase activation and the induction of apoptosis by adalimumab 
and the effect of a caspase inhibitor in vivo.
METHODS: For in vitro studies, THP-1 cells (human monocytic cell line) were 
incubated with adalimumab, infliximab, or human immunoglobulin G, and annexin V 
+ propidium iodide, Apo2.7, and 7-amino actinomycin-D were used to study 
apoptosis on the cell membrane, mitochodrial, and DNA level, respectively. 
Active caspase-3 was detected by intracellular staining. For in vivo studies, a 
chimeric human-mouse model was used, in which THP-1 cells were injected 
intraperitoneally in SCID-Beige mice followed by treatment with adalimumab, 
infliximab, or human immunoglobulin G. Effects of a pan-caspase inhibitor 
N-benzyloxycarbonyl-Val-Ala-Asp-fluoromethyketone on apoptosis induction were 
evaluated.
RESULTS: In vitro analysis revealed that apoptosis could be induced in THP-1 
cells by both adalimumab and infliximab. Activation of caspase-3 after 
incubation with adalimumab was demonstrated by intracellular staining. In 
addition, in the chimeric mouse model, a higher percentage of residual THP-1 
cells were apoptotic, and lower cell numbers were recovered in the adalimumab- 
or infliximab-treated mouse. Apoptosis induction by adalimumab could be 
abrogated through in vivo pretreatment of mice with the pan-caspase inhibitor.
CONCLUSIONS: Adalimumab, besides neutralizing tumor necrosis factor, also 
induces apoptosis of transmembrane tumor necrosis factor-positive THP-1 cells by 
activating intracellular caspases. This activity is likely to be important for 
the clinical effect of this biodrug.
