OBJECTIVE: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is characterized by profound mononuclear 
cell (MNC) recruitment into synovial tissue (ST), thought to be due in part to 
tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha), a therapeutic target for RA. Although 
chemokines may also be involved, the mechanisms remain unclear. We undertook 
this study to examine the participation of CXCL16, a novel chemokine, in 
recruitment of MNCs to RA ST in vivo and to determine the signal transduction 
pathways mediating this process.
METHODS: Using a human RA ST-SCID mouse chimera, immunohistochemistry, 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, real-time reverse transcription-polymerase 
chain reaction, flow cytometry, and in vitro chemotaxis assays, we defined the 
expression and function of CXCL16 and its receptor, CXCR6, as well as the signal 
transduction pathways utilized by them for MNC homing in vitro and in vivo.
RESULTS: CXCL16 was markedly elevated in RA synovial fluid (SF) samples, being 
as high as 145 ng/ml. Intense macrophage and lining cell staining for CXCL16 in 
RA ST correlated with increased CXCL16 messenger RNA levels in RA ST compared 
with those in osteoarthritis and normal ST. By fluorescence-activated cell 
sorting analysis, one-half of RA SF monocytes and one-third of memory 
lymphocytes expressed CXCR6. In vivo recruitment of human MNCs to RA ST 
implanted in SCID mice occurred in response to intragraft injection of human 
CXCL16, a response similar to that induced by TNFalpha. Lipofection of MNCs with 
antisense oligodeoxynucleotides for ERK-1/2 resulted in a 50% decline in 
recruitment to engrafted RA ST and a 5-fold decline in recruitment to regional 
lymph nodes. Interestingly, RA ST fibroblasts did not produce CXCL16 in response 
to TNFalpha in vitro, suggesting that CXCL16 protein may function in large part 
independently of TNFalpha.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, these results point to a unique role for CXCL16 as a 
premier MNC recruiter in RA and suggest additional therapeutic possibilities, 
targeting CXCL16, its receptor, or its signaling pathways.
