INTRODUCTION: Autoantibodies in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) are useful both for 
diagnosis and prognosis. Antibodies directed against citrullinated antigens have 
recently been shown to predict development of RA as well as poor outcome in 
early arthritis. Data on their role in established RA is limited. We studied the 
association of various autoantibodies in RA with its severity.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of one hundred and twenty nine-patients with 
established RA was enrolled and sera were collected and stored at -70 degrees C. 
Data regarding erosions, deformities, and extra-articular features were 
collected. IgM rheumatoid factor (RF) was measured using nephelometry and value 
above 20 U was considered positive. IgA RF was measured by enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and value above the mean+/-2 SD of normal healthy 
control was taken as positive. Anti-keratin antibody (AKA) was detected by 
indirect immunofluorescence assay using rat esophagus as substrate. Anti-cyclic 
citrullinated peptide (CCP) antibodies were measured by commercial ELISA and a 
value above 5 U was considered as positive.
RESULTS: The prevalence of various autoantibodies was: IgM RF 82.2%, anti-CCP 
antibodies 82.2%, AKA 51.9%, and anti IgA RF 45%. The concordance rate of 
anti-CCP antibodies with IgM RF was 83%, with AKA 68%, and with IgA RF 60.5%. 
All but one patient positive for AKA were positive for anti-CCP antibodies. The 
presence of IgM RF, AKA, and anti-CCP antibody was associated with joint 
erosions and deformities. None of the antibodies had any association with 
presence of extra-articular features. No association of IgA RF was seen with 
erosions, deformities, or extra-articular features. Among 23 seronegative RA 
patients, 11 were positive for anti-CCP antibodies and 6 were AKA positive. The 
presence of anti-CCP antibodies was associated with presence of deformities 
(p<0.05).
CONCLUSION: Anti-CCP antibodies are present in majority of patients with 
established RA including seronegative patients. Both anti-CCP and AKA, in 
addition to conventional marker like IgM RF, are associated with severe erosive 
disease.
