Nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB is a key regulator of synovial inflammation. We 
investigated the effect of local NF-kappaB inhibition in rat adjuvant arthritis 
(AA), using the specific IkappaB kinase (IKK)-beta blocking NF-kappaB essential 
modulator-binding domain (NBD) peptide. The effects of the NBD peptide on human 
fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS) and macrophages, as well as rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA) whole-tissue biopsies, were also evaluated. First, we 
investigated the effects of the NBD peptide on RA FLS in vitro. Subsequently, 
NBD peptides were administered intra-articularly into the right ankle joint of 
rats at the onset of disease. The severity of arthritis was monitored over time, 
rats were sacrificed on day 20, and tissue specimens were collected for routine 
histology and x-rays of the ankle joints. Human macrophages or RA synovial 
tissues were cultured ex vivo in the presence or absence of NBD peptides, and 
cytokine production was measured in the supernatant by enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay. The NBD peptide blocked interleukin (IL)-1-beta-induced 
IkappaB alpha phosphorylation and IL-6 production in RA FLS. Intra-articular 
injection of the NBD peptide led to significantly reduced severity of arthritis 
(p < 0.0001) and reduced radiological damage (p = 0.04). This was associated 
with decreased synovial cellularity and reduced expression of tumor necrosis 
factor (TNF)-alpha and IL-1-beta in the synovium. Incubation of human 
macrophages with NBD peptides resulted in 50% inhibition of IL-1-beta-induced 
TNF-alpha production in the supernatant (p < 0.01). In addition, the NBD peptide 
decreased TNF-alpha-induced IL-6 production by human RA synovial tissue biopsies 
by approximately 42% (p < 0.01). Specific NF-kappaB blockade using a small 
peptide inhibitor of IKK-beta has anti-inflammatory effects in AA and human RA 
synovial tissue as well as in two important cell types in the pathogenesis of 
RA: macrophages and FLS. These results indicate that IKK-beta-targeted NF-kappaB 
blockade using the NBD peptide could offer a new approach for the local 
treatment of arthritis.
