BACKGROUND & AIMS: Ghrelin is a novel growth hormone-releasing peptide with 
potential endogenous anti-inflammatory activities ameliorating some pathologic 
inflammatory conditions. Crohn's disease is a chronic debilitating disease 
characterized by severe T helper cell (Th)1-driven inflammation of the colon. 
The aim of this study was to investigate the therapeutic effect of ghrelin in a 
murine model of colitis.
METHODS: We examined the anti-inflammatory action of ghrelin in the colitis 
induced by intracolonic administration of trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid. Diverse 
clinical signs of the disease were evaluated, including weight loss, diarrhea, 
colitis, and histopathology. We also investigated the mechanisms involved in the 
potential therapeutic effect of ghrelin, such as inflammatory cytokines and 
chemokines, Th1-type response, and regulatory factors.
RESULTS: Ghrelin ameliorated significantly the clinical and histopathologic 
severity of the trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid-induced colitis; abrogating body 
weight loss, diarrhea, and inflammation; and increasing survival. The 
therapeutic effect was associated with down-regulation of both inflammatory and 
Th1-driven autoimmune response through the regulation of a wide spectrum of 
inflammatory mediators. In addition, a partial involvement of 
interluekin-10/transforming growth factor-beta1-secreting regulatory T cells in 
this therapeutic effect was demonstrated. Importantly, the ghrelin treatment was 
therapeutically effective in established colitis and avoided the recurrence of 
the disease.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data demonstrate novel anti-inflammatory actions for ghrelin in 
the gastrointestinal tract, ie, the capacity to deactivate the intestinal 
inflammatory response and to restore mucosal immune tolerance at multiple 
levels. Consequently, ghrelin administration represents a novel possible 
therapeutic approach for the treatment of Crohn's disease and other Th1-mediated 
inflammatory diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis and multiple sclerosis.
