Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an autoimmune disease affecting approximately 1% of 
the population worldwide. Previously, we showed that human T-cell leukemia virus 
type I-transgenic mice and interleukin-1 receptor antagonist-knockout mice 
develop autoimmunity and joint-specific inflammation that resembles human RA. To 
identify genes involved in the pathogenesis of arthritis, we analyzed the gene 
expression profiles of these animal models by using high-density oligonucleotide 
arrays. We found 1,467 genes that were differentially expressed from the normal 
control mice by greater than threefold in one of these animal models. The gene 
expression profiles of the two models correlated well. We extracted 554 genes 
whose expression significantly changed in both models, assuming that 
pathogenically important genes at the effector phase would change in both 
models. Then, each of these commonly changed genes was mapped into the whole 
genome in a scale of the 1-megabase pairs. We found that the transcriptome map 
of these genes did not distribute evenly on the chromosome but formed clusters. 
These identified gene clusters include the major histocompatibility complex 
class I and class II genes, complement genes, and chemokine genes, which are 
well known to be involved in the pathogenesis of RA at the effector phase. The 
activation of these gene clusters suggests that antigen presentation and 
lymphocyte chemotaxis are important for the development of arthritis. Moreover, 
by searching for such clusters, we could detect genes with marginal expression 
changes. These gene clusters include schlafen and membrane-spanning four-domains 
subfamily A genes whose function in arthritis has not yet been determined. Thus, 
by combining two etiologically different RA models, we succeeded in efficiently 
extracting genes functioning in the development of arthritis at the effector 
phase. Furthermore, we demonstrated that identification of gene clusters by 
transcriptome mapping is a useful way to find potentially pathogenic genes among 
genes whose expression change is only marginal.
