OBJECTIVE: To explore the effect of bizhongxiao decoction (BZXD) on the protein 
maps of BZXD-treated synovitis of collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) in rats in 
2-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2-DE), and to provide new clues for 
illuminating the active mechanism of BZXD in treating the rheumatoid arthritis 
(RA).
METHODS: Seventy SD rats were randomly divided into nor- mal group, model group 
and BZXD group. The experimental arthritis rat model was established by 
subcutaneouly injecting Type II collagen and complete Freunds adjuvant. The 
total proteins of synovial tissue of rat joints in the normal group, model group 
and BZXD group were seperated by 2-DE respectively. The gels of the 3 groups 
were stained by Coomassie brilliant blue. Electron pictures were obtained by 
scanning the gels, and then the differential proteins among the normal group, 
model group and BZXD group were examined by comparing the spots density volume 
in the gels. The electrophoregrams of the gels were analyzed in Pdquest 
software.
RESULTS: The incidence of arthritis in the rats was approximately 88%. The 2-DE 
maps of rat synovial tissue in the normal group, model group and BZXD group were 
well duplicated. The average protein spots in the normal group, model group and 
BZXD group were 947 +/- 39, 994 +/- 41, and 1031 +/- 52, and the match rates 
were 92%, 91%, and 94.2% respectively. The average deviations of spot position 
were (0.896 +/- 0.217) mm in isoelectric focusing (IEF) and (1.102 +/- 0.104) mm 
in sodiumdo-decylsufate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE), 
respectively. Three hundred twenty-eight differential proteins were observed 
between the model group and BZXD group, of which 174 were up-regulated, 147 were 
down-regulated in the BZXD group, and 7 proteins were expressed only in the 
model group. One hundred ninty-three differential proteins were displayed 
between the model group and the normal group, of which 123 proteins were 
up-regulated and 70 were down-regulated in the model group.
CONCLUSION: 2-DE protein expression profiles of synovial tissue in CIA rats are 
established, and many differential proteins are discovered. Further analysis on 
the differential proteins may serve as a new method to study the moleculer 
mechanism of BZXD in treating the rheumatoid arthritis.
