OBJECTIVE: Interleukin-4 (IL-4) can modulate neovascularization. In this study, 
we used a gene therapy approach to investigate the role of IL-4 in angiogenesis 
in rat adjuvant-induced arthritis (AIA), a model for rheumatoid arthritis.
METHODS: Rats received an adenovirus producing IL-4 (AxCAIL-4), a control virus 
without insert, or control vehicle (phosphate buffered saline) intraarticularly 
before arthritis onset. At peak onset of arthritis, rats were killed. 
Vascularization was determined in the synovial tissue, and correlations with 
inflammation were assessed. Ankle homogenates were used in angiogenesis assays 
in vitro and in vivo, and protein levels of cytokines and growth factors were 
assessed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Synovial tissue expression of 
alphav integrins was determined by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: IL-4 induced a reduction in synovial tissue vessel density, which was 
paralleled by a decrease in inflammation. AxCAIL-4 joint homogenates 
significantly (P < 0.05) inhibited both endothelial cell (EC) migration and tube 
formation in vitro. Similarly, AxCAIL-4 inhibited capillary sprouting in the rat 
aortic ring assay, and vessel growth in the in vivo Matrigel plug assay. The 
angiostatic effect occurred despite high levels of vascular endothelial growth 
factor (VEGF), and was associated with down-regulation of the proangiogenic 
cytokines IL-18, CXCL16, and CXCL5 and up-regulation of the angiogenesis 
inhibitor endostatin. Of interest, AxCAIL-4 also resulted in decreased EC 
expression of the alphav and beta3 integrin chains.
CONCLUSION: In rat AIA, IL-4 reduces synovial tissue vascularization via 
angiostatic effects, mediates inhibition of angiogenesis via an association with 
altered pro- and antiangiogenic cytokines, and may inhibit VEGF-mediated 
angiogenesis and exert its angiostatic role in part via alphavbeta3 integrin. 
This knowledge of the specific angiostatic effects of IL-4 may help optimize 
target-oriented treatment of inflammatory arthritis.
