BACKGROUND: Irreversible, permanent and scarring alopecia is associated with 
several autoimmune diseases, including all autoimmune connective tissue 
disorders. The pathogenesis of autoimmune-induced permanent alopecia (APA) is 
still poorly understood, and instructive, simple mouse models for the study of 
APA are needed urgently. During the course of our studies in a well-established 
mouse model for chronic rheumatoid arthritis, the New Zealand Black/KN (NZB/KN) 
mouse, we noticed that ageing male NZB/KN mice developed spontaneous APA.
OBJECTIVES: To study whether alopecia seen in ageing male NZB/KN mice displays 
key features of human APA and may, thus, be a useful new mouse model for 
clinically relevant APA research.
METHODS: NZB/KN, the F1 hybrid of NZW/N Slc x NZB/KN (W/BKN F1), the F1 hybrid 
of NZB/KN x NZW/N Slc (BKN/W F1), and the F2 hybrid of W/BKN F1 x W/BKN F1 mice 
were employed in this study, in order to check which strain carries the highest 
risk of alopecia development. Besides routine histology, CD3, CD4 and CD8 
expression as well as immunoglobulin (Ig) G and IgM deposition in hair follicles 
were investigated by immunohistology/immunofluorescence. Mast cell 
distribution/degranulation and Ki-67 (proliferation)/TUNEL (terminal 
deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP-biotin nick end labelling) 
(apoptosis) positive cells were also analysed.
RESULTS: Only F2 male NZB/KN mice were prone to develop alopecia, suggesting 
that Y chromosome-associated gene(s) are involved in the pathogenesis of APA, 
which incidence rises with increasing age. The lesional alopecia skin in 
12-month-old male NZB/KN mice showed a sharp decline in hair follicle density, 
thus meeting a key criterion of permanent alopecia. Both macroscopically and 
histologically, the alopecia seen in these mice resembled in many respects 
different stages of clinical APA, such as alopecia associated with chronic 
discoid lupus erythematosus (DLE) in humans. Lesional APA hair follicles in mice 
displayed intrafollicular and perifollicular mononuclear cell infiltrates, as 
well as an increased number of activated (degranulated) perifollicular mast 
cells. In the fully developed lesion, many CD4+ cells were seen in 
perifollicular locations, including the epithelial stem cell region (bulge), and 
also contained a few CD8+ T cells. IgM deposits were found in the follicular 
basement membrane zone (BMZ). Both in the bulge and the hair matrix region of 
the affected anagen hair follicles, there were signs of massive keratinocyte 
apoptosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our currently available data suggest that male but not female 
NZB/KN mice may indeed represent a suitable mouse model for APA, with some 
similarities to the permanent alopecia seen in human DLE patients, although 
additional and confirmatory investigations are needed before this mouse strain 
can be accepted as a murine equivalent of APA in humans.
