Leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF), oncostatin M, leptin, ciliary neurotrophic 
factor, cardiotrophin 1, cardiotrophin-like cytokine factor 1, interleukin 6 
(IL6), interleukin 11 and interleukin 27 activate the gp130-JAK-STAT3 signaling 
cascade. Here, WNT5A was characterized as the evolutionarily conserved target of 
the STAT3 signaling cascade based on 11-bp-spaced tandem STAT3-binding sites 
within intron 4 of human, chimpanzee, cow, mouse and rat WNT5A orthologs. 
Canonical WNT5A signaling through Frizzled and LRP5/LRP6 receptors activates 
FGF20, WISP1, MYC and CCND1 transcription for the maintenance of stem/progenitor 
cells, while non-canonical WNT5A signaling through Frizzled and ROR2/PTK7/RYK 
receptors activates the RHOA, JNK, NLK and NFAT signaling cascades for the 
control of tissue polarity, cell adhesion or movement. LIF-induced Wnt5a 
activates canonical Wnt signaling in mouse embryonic stem cells for 
self-renewal. STAT3-induced Wnt5a activates non-canonical Wnt signaling in rat 
cardiac myocytes for N-cadherin-dependent aggregation. IL6, secreted from 
epithelial cells or macrophages, induces WNT5A upregulation in mesenchymal 
cells. WNT5A then activates canonical WNT signaling in epithelial cells. 
IL6-induced WNT5A activates canonical WNT signaling for autocrine proliferation 
of human synovial fibroblasts in rheumatoid arthritis. IL-6 signaling is 
activated during human chronic atrophic gastritis with Helicobacter pylori 
infection, and aberrant Stat3 signaling activation gives rise to mouse gastric 
tumors. WNT5A is frequently upregulated in human primary gastric cancer due to 
tumor-stromal interaction. WNT5A might be downregulated in advanced cancer with 
poorer prognosis due to genetic alterations compensating WNT5A signaling. 
Oncogenic WNT5A activates canonical WNT signaling in cancer stem cells for 
self-renewal, and non-canonical WNT signaling at the tumor-stromal interface for 
invasion and metastasis. SNP of genes encoding components of the 
cytokine-induced WNT5A signaling loop is a predicted risk factor for RA and 
cancer, especially diffuse-type gastric and pancreatic cancer. Humanized 
anti-IL6 receptor antibody and WNT5A mimetic small-molecule antagonist could be 
applied to personalized medicine for RA and cancer driven by the IL6-induced 
WNT5A signaling loop.
