OBJECTIVE: To determine the disease-modifying activity and mechanism of action 
of the orally available methionine aminopeptidase type 2 inhibitor, 
[(1R)-1-carbamoyl-2-methyl-propyl]-carbamic 
acid-(3R,4S,5S,6R)-5-methoxy-4-[(2R,3R)-2-methyl-3-(3-methyl-but-2-enyl)-oxiranyl]-1-oxa-spiro 
[2.5] oct-6-yl ester (PPI-2458), in a rat model of peptidoglycan-polysaccharide 
(PG-PS)-induced arthritis.
METHODS: Arthritis was induced in rats by administration of PG-PS, causing 
tarsal joint swelling and histopathologic changes characteristic of rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA). PPI-2458, a potent irreversible methionine aminopeptidase type 2 
inhibitor, was administered orally every other day at 1, 5, or 10 mg/kg.
RESULTS: In an in vitro osteoclastogenesis model, PPI-2458 potently inhibited 
osteoclast differentiation and bone resorption. In the rat PG-PS arthritis 
model, PPI-2458 afforded significant protection against established disease 
after therapeutic dosing. This in vivo activity of PPI-2458 was linked to the 
inhibition of methionine aminopeptidase type 2. Histopathologic assessment of 
affected joints showed improvement in processes of inflammation, bone 
resorption, and cartilage erosion, associated with significant improvement in 
all clinical indices. The protective effects of PPI-2458 against bone 
destruction in vivo, including the structural preservation of affected hind 
joints, correlated with improvements in bone histomorphometric markers, as 
determined by microfocal computed tomography and a significant decrease in 
systemic C-telopeptide of type I collagen, suggesting decreased osteoclast 
activity in vivo. Moreover, PPI-2458 prevented cartilage erosion as shown by a 
significant decrease in systemic cartilage oligomeric matrix protein.
CONCLUSION: The findings of this study suggest that PPI-2458 exerts 
disease-modifying activity in experimental arthritis through its direct 
inhibition of several pathophysiologic processes of this disease. These results 
provide a rationale for assessing the potential of PPI-2458 as a novel RA 
therapy.
