BACKGROUND: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and its accepted animal model, murine 
collagen-induced arthritis (CIA), are classic autoimmune inflammatory diseases 
which require proinflammatory cytokine production for pathogenesis. We and 
others have previously used N, N-dimethylglycine (DMG) and extracts from the New 
Zealand green-lipped mussel Perna canaliculus (Perna) as potent immunomodulators 
to modify ongoing immune and/or inflammatory responses.
METHODS: In our initial studies, we treated lipopolysaccahride (LPS) stimulated 
THP-1 monocytes in vitro with increasing concentrations of Perna extract or DMG. 
Additionally, we treated rat peripheral blood neutrophils with increasing 
concentrations of Perna extract and measured superoxide burst. In subsequent in 
vivo experiments, CIA was induced by administration of type II collagen; rats 
were prophylactically treated with either Perna or DMG, and then followed for 
disease severity. Finally, to test whether Perna and/or DMG could block or 
inhibit an ongoing pathologic disease process, we induced CIA in mice and 
treated them therapeutically with either of the two immunomodulators.
RESULTS: Following LPS stimulation of THP-1 monocytes, we observed 
dose-dependent reductions in TNF-alpha and IL-12p40 production in Perna treated 
cultures. DMG treatment, however, showed significant increases in both of these 
cytokines in the range of 0.001-1 microM. We also demonstrate that in vitro 
neutrophil superoxide burst activity is dose-dependently reduced in the presence 
of Perna. Significant reductions in disease incidence, onset, and severity of 
CIA in rats were noted following prophylactic treatment with either of the two 
immunomodulators. More importantly, amelioration of mouse CIA was observed 
following therapeutic administration of Perna. In contrast, DMG appeared to have 
little effect in mice and may act in a species-specific manner.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that Perna, and perhaps DMG, may be useful 
supplements to the treatment of RA in humans.
