OBJECTIVE: NF-kappaB inhibitors applied to animal models of rheumatoid arthritis 
(RA) demonstrate the important role of NF-kappaB in the production of mediators 
of inflammation in the joint and their antiinflammatory effects. Because 
NF-kappaB is involved in the differentiation, activation, and survival of almost 
all cells, its prolonged inhibition might have unwanted adverse effects. 
Therefore, we sought to apply NF-kappaB inhibitors more specifically, targeting 
dendritic cell (DC) differentiation, in order to influence the outcome of the 
autoimmune response, rather than to produce a broad antiinflammatory effect. We 
tested whether DCs treated with the NF-kappaB inhibitor BAY 11-7082 and exposed 
to arthritogenic antigen would suppress established arthritis in C57BL/6 mice.
METHODS: Antigen-induced arthritis was generated in C57BL/6 mice by injection of 
methylated bovine serum albumin (mBSA). After mBSA challenge, mouse knee joints 
were injected with antigen-exposed BAY 11-7082-treated DCs or with soluble tumor 
necrosis factor receptor (sTNFR). Intraarticular injection of interleukin-1 
(IL-1) was used to induce disease flare.
RESULTS: Inflammation and erosion were suppressed in mice that received 
mBSA-exposed BAY 11-7082-treated DCs, but not in those that received keyhole 
limpet hemocyanin-exposed BAY 11-7082-treated DCs. Clinical improvement was 
dependent on IL-10 and was associated with antigen-specific suppression of the 
delayed-type hypersensitivity (DTH) reaction and switching of anti-mBSA antibody 
isotype from IgG2b to IgG1 and IgA. Suppression of the DTH reaction or arthritic 
disease was not impaired by concomitant administration of sTNFR. Suppression 
could be reversed with intraarticular administration of IL-1beta and could be 
restored by a second injection of mBSA-exposed BAY 11-7082-treated DCs.
CONCLUSION: BAY 11-7082-treated DCs induce antigen-specific immune suppression 
in this model of inflammatory arthritis, even after full clinical expression of 
the disease. Such DCs have potential as antigen-specific therapy for autoimmune 
inflammatory arthritis, including RA.
