OBJECTIVE: Patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) have increased concentrations 
of the amino acid glutamate in synovial fluid. This study was undertaken to 
determine whether glutamate receptors are expressed in the synovial joint, and 
to determine whether activation of glutamate receptors on human synoviocytes 
contributes to RA disease pathology.
METHODS: Glutamate receptor expression was examined in tissue samples from rat 
knee joints and in human fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS). FLS from 5 RA 
patients and 1 normal control were used to determine whether a range of 
glutamate receptor antagonists influenced expression of the proinflammatory 
cytokine interleukin-6 (IL-6), enzymes involved in matrix degradation and 
cytokine processing (matrix metalloproteinase 2 [MMP-2] and MMP-9), and the 
inhibitors of these enzymes (tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases 1 [TIMP-1] 
and TIMP-2). IL-6 concentrations were determined by enzyme-linked immunosorbent 
assay, MMP activity was measured by gelatin zymography, and TIMP activity was 
determined by reverse zymography. Fluorescence imaging of intracellular calcium 
concentrations in live RA FLS stimulated with specific antagonists was used to 
reveal functional activation of glutamate receptors that modulated IL-6 or 
MMP-2.
RESULTS: Ionotropic and metabotropic glutamate receptor subunit mRNA were 
expressed in the patella, fat pad, and meniscus of the rat knee and in human 
articular cartilage. Inhibition of N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors in RA 
FLS increased proMMP-2 release, whereas non-NMDA ionotropic glutamate receptor 
antagonists reduced IL-6 production by these cells. Stimulation with glutamate, 
NMDA, or kainate (KA) increased intracellular calcium concentrations in RA FLS, 
demonstrating functional activation of specific ionotropic glutamate receptors.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate that activation of NMDA and KA glutamate 
receptors on human synoviocytes may contribute to joint destruction by 
increasing IL-6 expression.
