The effectiveness of a new antibody treatment on arthritis-associated osteolysis 
was studied by using CIA mice. GGT, a newly identified bone-resorbing factor, 
was upregulated in arthritic joints. We generated monoclonal antibodies against 
GGT and injected them into CIA mice. Mice treated with antibodies showed a 
reduction in osteoclast number and bone erosion.
INTRODUCTION: Gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT) acts as a bone-resorbing 
factor that stimulates osteoclast formation. GGT expression has been detected in 
active lymphocytes that accumulate at inflammation sites, such as rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA). We hypothesize that GGT is an effective target for suppression 
of arthritis-related osteoclastogenesis and joint destruction. Here, we describe 
the therapeutic effect of neutralizing antibodies against GGT on joint 
destruction using a collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) mouse model.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: GGT expression in the synovium of RA patients and CIA 
mice was determined by immunohistochemistry and RT-PCR. Monoclonal antibodies 
were generated against recombinant human GGT (GGT-mAbs) using BALB/c mice. 
Antibody treatment was performed by intraperitoneal injections of GGT-mAbs into 
CIA mice. Effects of antibody treatment on arthritis and bone erosion were 
evaluated by incidence score, arthritis score, and histopathological 
observations. The role of GGT in osteoclast development was examined by using 
the established osteoclastogenic culture system.
RESULTS: GGT expression was significantly upregulated in inflamed synovium. 
Immunohistochemistry revealed that GGT was present in lymphocytes, plasma cells, 
and macrophages, as well as capillaries. Injection of GGT-mAbs significantly 
decreased the number of osteoclasts and attenuated the severity of joint 
destruction in CIA mice. In vitro examination showed that GGT enhanced 
RANKL-dependent osteoclast formation. GGT stimulated the expression of RANKL in 
osteoblasts and its receptor RANK in osteoclast precursors, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: This study indicates that inflamed synovial tissue-derived GGT acts 
as a risk factor for joint destruction and that the antibody-mediated inhibition 
of GGT significantly decreases osteoclast number and bone erosion in CIA mice. 
GGT antagonists might be novel therapeutic agents for attenuating joint 
destruction in RA patients.
