Identification of specific protein phosphorylation sites provides predicative 
signatures of cellular activity and specific disease states such as cancer, 
diabetes, Alzheimer disease, and rheumatoid arthritis. Recent progress in 
phosphopeptide isolation technology and tandem mass spectrometry has provided 
the means to identify thousands of phosphorylation sites from a single 
biological sample. These advances now make it possible to profile global changes 
in the phosphoproteome at an unprecedented level. However, although this 
technology is generating a wealth of information, there is currently no 
efficient means to identify phosphoprotein signatures shared among large 
phosphoprotein databases. Identification of common phosphoprotein signatures 
found in biologically relevant systems and their conservation throughout 
evolution would provide valuable insight into mechanisms of signal transduction 
and cell function. Here we describe the development of a computational program 
(PhosphoBlast) that can rapidly match thousands of phosphopeptides that share 
phosphorylation sites within and across species. PhosphoBlast analysis of 
several large phosphoprotein datasets from the literature revealed common 
phosphorylation signatures shared across diverse experimental platforms and 
species. Moreover PhosphoBlast is a powerful analysis tool to identify specific 
phosphosite mutations. Comparison of the mouse and human phosphoproteomes 
revealed more than 130 specific phosphoamino acid mutations, some of which are 
predicted to alter protein function. Further analysis revealed that known 
phosphorylated amino acids are more evolutionally conserved than the Ser/Thr/Tyr 
amino acids not known to be phosphorylated. Together our results demonstrate 
that PhosphoBlast is a versatile mining tool capable of identifying related 
phosphorylation signatures and phosphoamino acid mutations among complex 
proteomics datasets in a highly efficient and accurate manner. PhosphoBlast will 
aid in the informatics analysis of the phosphoproteome and the identification of 
phosphoprotein biomarkers of disease.
