With the use of a commonly utilized animal model of rheumatoid arthritis, the 
central goal of this work was to determine how well the small-animal imaging 
tools, small-animal MRI (microMRI) and small-animal X-ray computed tomography 
(microCT), can detect very early histological changes that occur immediately 
after induction of the disease. Arthritis was induced in rats by injecting 
complete Freund's adjuvant into the tail. Right hind paws of living rats were 
evaluated with 4.7 T microMRI with T1-weighted spin echo and inversion recovery 
sequences. Paw specimens were also evaluated with microCT and by histological 
examination (n = 29). MicroMR images were scored for the presence of joint 
effusion, soft tissue swelling, bone marrow changes, and bone erosions. MicroCT 
measured bone mineral density (BMD). Histology scores were obtained from 
representative slides from the same rats. The correlation between BMD, MRI and 
histology was analyzed using linear regression analysis and analysis of 
covariance. MRI abnormalities were detected on day 5 after induction as joint 
effusion and soft tissue swelling, followed by bone marrow changes on day 6 and 
bone erosion on day 8. BMD measured by microCT decreased, the decrease becoming 
significant on day 7 (P < 0.019). Soft tissue swelling, joint effusion, and bone 
erosion scores on microMRI correlated with histology (r2 approximately 0.7). 
Bone marrow changes were seen more clearly with microMRI than by histological 
examination. Bone loss could be detected earlier by microCT than on histological 
sections. In conclusion, microMRI and microCT can be used to evaluate early 
disease changes within 1 week of induction in the adjuvant-induced arthritis 
model, and have the ability to detect certain manifestations of disease earlier 
than histological analysis. The use of small-animal imaging techniques 
potentially allows earlier diagnosis, improved subject stratification, earlier 
drug implementation, and therefore improved drug trials in animal models of 
rheumatoid arthritis.
