BACKGROUND: Recent studies have placed gene expression in the context of 
distribution profiles including housekeeping, graded, and bimodal (switch-like). 
Single-gene studies have shown bimodal expression results from healthy cell 
signaling and complex diseases such as cancer, however developing a 
comprehensive list of human bimodal genes has remained a major challenge due to 
inherent noise in human microarray data. This study presents a two-component 
mixture analysis of mouse gene expression data for genes on the Affymetrix 
MG-U74Av2 array for the detection and annotation of switch-like genes. 
Two-component normal mixtures were fit to the data to identify bimodal genes and 
their potential roles in cell signaling and disease progression.
RESULTS: Seventeen percent of the genes on the MG-U74Av2 array (1519 out of 
9091) were identified as bimodal or switch-like. KEGG pathways significantly 
enriched for bimodal genes included ECM-receptor interaction, cell 
communication, and focal adhesion. Similarly, the GO biological process "cell 
adhesion" and cellular component "extracellular matrix" were significantly 
enriched. Switch-like genes were found to be associated with such diseases as 
congestive heart failure, Alzheimer's disease, arteriosclerosis, breast 
neoplasms, hypertension, myocardial infarction, obesity, rheumatoid arthritis, 
and type I and type II diabetes. In diabetes alone, over two hundred bimodal 
genes were in a different mode of expression compared to normal tissue.
CONCLUSION: This research identified and annotated bimodal or switch-like genes 
in the mouse genome using a large collection of microarray data. Genes with 
bimodal expression were enriched within the cell membrane and extracellular 
environment. Hundreds of bimodal genes demonstrated alternate modes of 
expression in diabetic muscle, pancreas, liver, heart, and adipose tissue. 
Bimodal genes comprise a candidate set of biomarkers for a large number of 
disease states because their expressions are tightly regulated at the 
transcription level.
