INTRODUCTION: Thermal imaging has been utilized, both preclinically and 
clinically, as a tool for assessing inflammation and arthritis. However, 
previous studies have employed large, relatively immobile devises to obtain the 
thermal signature of the tissue of interest. The present study describes the 
characterization of a hand-held thermal imaging device in a preclinical model of 
general inflammation and a model of rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
METHODS: A hand-held ThermoView Ti30 portable thermal imager was utilized to 
detect the temporal changes in thermal signatures in rat model of 
carrageenan-induced paw edema (CFE) and a model of collagen-induced arthritis 
(CIA). In both in vivo models, the kinetics of the thermal changes were 
correlated to footpad swelling. In addition, the CFE model was utilized to 
examine the ability of this technology to delineate pharmacodynamic changes in 
thermal signature in response to the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug 
indomethacin (10 mg/kg; p.o.).
RESULTS: Thermal analysis of rat paws in the CFE model demonstrated a 
significant increase in the mean temperature difference between the inflamed and 
contralateral control paw by two hours post-carrageenan (8.3 +/-0.5 degrees F). 
Indomethacin significantly decreased the mean temperature difference in treated 
animals as compared to vehicle. In the rat CIA model, increases in footpad 
temperature, as determined by thermal imaging, were significantly elevated by 
Day 11 and remained elevated throughout the duration of the 28 day protocol. 
Thermal changes were also found to precede increases in footpad edema 
(swelling).
DISCUSSION: The results of this study demonstrate that the hand-held thermal 
imaging technology represents a rapid, highly-reproducible method by which to 
quantitate the degree of inflammation in rat models of general inflammation and 
rheumatoid arthritis. The ability to detect pharmacodynamic responses in paw 
temperature suggests that this technology may be a useful tool for the 
development of pharmacologic interventions for the treatment 
inflammation-related pathologies.
