OBJECTIVE: The antigen-presenting lectin-like receptor complex (APLEC) was 
recently identified as a genetic determinant for arthritis susceptibility. We 
undertook this study to define mechanisms underlying the impact of APLEC on 
arthritis, to determine whether sex effects occur, and to determine whether 
APLEC influences different types of arthritis and phenotypes other than 
susceptibility.
METHODS: Arthritis-susceptible DA rats were compared with sex-matched congenic 
rats in which APLEC alleles were substituted with alleles from 
arthritis-resistant PVG rats. Six different arthritogenic agents were injected 
at the base of the tail: Freund's incomplete adjuvant, pristane, squalene, 
killed mycobacteria, yeast beta-glucan, or rat type II collagen (CII). Arthritis 
was visually scored, body weight was measured, and anti-CII IgG and cytokine 
messenger RNA (mRNA) levels were determined by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction, respectively.
RESULTS: In 5 models of rheumatoid arthritis (RA), congenic rats deviated 
profoundly from DA rats by having reduced arthritis susceptibility, delayed 
onset, decreased severity, and/or reduced body weight loss. Paradoxical opposite 
genetic effects were noted, including a more severe disease course in congenic 
males in pristane-induced arthritis and decreased clinical signs in 
collagen-induced arthritis despite increased autoantibody levels. Interestingly, 
the anti-CII IgG isotype profile was skewed in congenic rats, and markedly 
reduced lymph node mRNA levels for interleukin-17 suggested that the cytokine 
profile of autoreactive T helper cells was also skewed in a less pathogenic 
direction.
CONCLUSION: Rat APLEC regulates autoimmunity and multiple phenotypes in several 
types of arthritis. However, delineating the genetic impact may require 
stratification for sex or mode of arthritis induction. This pathogenetic 
complexity should be considered when evaluating APLEC in inflammatory and 
autoimmune diseases, including RA.
