INTRODUCTION: IL-1beta is a proinflammatory cytokine driving joint inflammation 
as well as systemic signs of inflammation, such as fever and acute phase protein 
production.
METHODS: ACZ885, a fully human monoclonal antibody that neutralizes the 
bioactivity of human IL-1beta, was generated to study the potent and 
long-lasting neutralization of IL-1beta in mechanistic animal models as well as 
in a proof-of-concept study in patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
RESULTS: The mouse IL-1 receptor cross-reacts with human IL-1beta, and it was 
demonstrated that ACZ885 can completely suppress IL-1beta-mediated joint 
inflammation and cartilage destruction in mice. This observation prompted us to 
study the safety, tolerability and pharmacodynamic activity of ACZ885 in RA 
patients in a small proof-of-concept study--the first to be conducted in humans. 
Patients with active RA despite treatment with stable doses of methotrexate were 
enrolled in this dose escalation study. The first 32 patients were split into 
four cohorts of eight patients each (six were randomly assigned to active 
treatment and two to placebo). ACZ885 doses were 0.3, 1, 3 and 10 mg/kg, 
administered intravenously on days 1 and 15. To explore efficacy within 6 weeks 
of treatment, an additional 21 patients were randomly assigned to the 10 mg/kg 
cohort, resulting in a total of 20 patients dosed with 10 mg/kg and 15 patients 
treated with placebo. There was clinical improvement (American College of 
Rheumatology 20% improvement criteria) at week 6 in the 10 mg/kg treatment 
group; however, this did not reach statistical significance (P = 0.085). A 
statistically significant reduction in disease activity score was observed after 
4 weeks in the 10 mg/kg group. Onset of action was rapid, because most 
responders exhibited improvement in their symptoms within the first 3 weeks. 
C-reactive protein levels decreased in patients treated with ACZ885 within 1 
week. ACZ885 was well tolerated. Three patients receiving ACZ885 developed 
infectious episodes that required treatment. No anti-ACZ885 antibodies were 
detected during the study.
CONCLUSION: ACZ885 administration to methotrexate-refractory patients resulted 
in clinical improvement in a subset of patients. Additional studies to 
characterize efficacy in RA and to determine the optimal dose regimen appear 
warranted.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov identifier NCT00619905.
