OBJECTIVE: The synovial fibroblast, or fibroblast-like synoviocyte (FLS), has a 
central role in pannus invasion and destruction of cartilage and bone in 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA). However, regulation of the FLS remains incompletely 
understood. The aim of this study was to determine whether the invasive 
properties of FLS are genetically regulated by arthritis severity loci.
METHODS: DA rats (arthritis susceptible) and rat strains congenic for 
arthritis-protective intervals were studied. Primary FLS cell lines were 
generated from each strain and used in a well-established FLS invasion model 
through a collagen-rich barrier. Cells or culture supernatants were analyzed for 
gene expression, activity of different matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), 
cytoskeleton integrity, and cell proliferation.
RESULTS: The median number of FLS from DA.F344(Cia5d) rats that invaded through 
the collagen-rich barrier was reduced 86.5% compared with the median number of 
invading FLS from DA rats. Histologic examination showed that DA.F344(Cia5d) 
rats preserved a normal joint without pannus, hyperplasia, or erosions. FLS from 
DA.F344(Cia5d) rats produced significantly lower levels of active MMP-2 compared 
with FLS from DA rats, but the levels of proMMP-2 and MMP-2 messenger RNA in 
DA.F344(Cia5d) rats were similar to those in DA rats. Treatment of FLS from DA 
rats with an MMP-2 inhibitor reduced cell invasion to a level similar to that in 
DA.F344(Cia5d) rats, demonstrating that MMP-2 activity accounted for the 
difference between FLS from these 2 strains. Analysis of MMP-2-activating 
pathways revealed increased levels of soluble membrane type 1 (MT1)-MMP in DA 
rats compared with DA.F344(Cia5d) rats.
CONCLUSION: These data represent the first evidence for a genetic component in 
the regulation of FLS invasion. A gene located within the Cia5d interval 
accounts for this effect and operates via the regulation of soluble MT1-MMP 
production and MMP-2 activation. These observations suggest novel potential 
pathways for prognostication and therapy.
