Autoantibodies play a key role in diagnostic laboratories as markers of 
autoimmune diseases. In addition to their role as markers they mediate diverse 
effects in vivo. Autoantibodies with protective effect have been described. 
Natural protective IgM autoantibodies against tumour-antigens of malignant cells 
or their precursors may contribute to increased survival rates of carcinoma 
patients. In a mouse model of systemic lupus erythematosus it has been shown 
that anti-dsDNA IgM autoantibodies protect from glomerular damage. In contrast, 
a direct pathogenic role of autoantibodies has been well established e.g. in 
myasthenia gravis or in Goodpasture syndrome. Similarly autoantibodies against 
SSA Ro52 are detrimental in neonatal lupus erythematosus with congenital heart 
block. Moreover, putatively protective autoantibodies may become pathogenic 
during the course of the disease such as the onconeuronal autoantibodies whose 
pathogenicity depends on their compartmentalisation. In patients with 
paraneoplastic syndromes tumour cells express proteins that are also naturally 
present in the brain. Anti-tumour autoantibodies which temporarily suppress 
tumour growth can provoke an autoimmune attack on neurons once having crossed 
the blood-brain barrier and cause specific neurological symptoms. Only a 
restricted number of autoantibodies are useful follow-up markers for the 
effectiveness of treatment in autoimmune diseases. Certain autoantibodies hold 
prognostic value and appear years or even decades before the diagnosis of 
disease such as the antimitochondrial antibodies in primary biliary cirrhosis or 
anti-citrullinated protein (CCP)-antibodies in rheumatoid arthritis. It is 
crucial to know whether the autoantibodies in question recognise linear or 
conformational epitopes in order to choose the appropriate detection methods. 
Indirect immunofluorescence microscopy remains a very useful tool for 
confirmation of results of commercially available immunoassays and for detection 
of special and rare autoantibodies that otherwise often remain undetected. 
Standardisation of autoimmune diagnostics is still underway and requires joint 
efforts by laboratories, clinicians and industry.
