BACKGROUND: Follicular structures resembling germinal centres (GCs) that are 
characterized by follicular dendritic cell (FDC) networks have long been 
recognized in chronically inflamed tissues in autoimmune diseases, including the 
synovium of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). However, it is debated whether these 
ectopic structures promote autoimmunity and chronic inflammation driving the 
production of pathogenic autoantibodies. Anti-citrullinated protein/peptide 
antibodies (ACPA) are highly specific markers of RA, predict a poor prognosis, 
and have been suggested to be pathogenic. Therefore, the main study objectives 
were to determine whether ectopic lymphoid structures in RA synovium: (i) 
express activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID), the enzyme required for 
somatic hypermutation and class-switch recombination (CSR) of Ig genes; (ii) 
support ongoing CSR and ACPA production; and (iii) remain functional in a 
RA/severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) chimera model devoid of new immune 
cell influx into the synovium.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: Using immunohistochemistry (IHC) and quantitative Taqman 
real-time PCR (QT-PCR) in synovial tissue from 55 patients with RA, we 
demonstrated that FDC+ structures invariably expressed AID with a distribution 
resembling secondary lymphoid organs. Further, AID+/CD21+ follicular structures 
were surrounded by ACPA+/CD138+ plasma cells, as demonstrated by immune 
reactivity to citrullinated fibrinogen. Moreover, we identified a novel subset 
of synovial AID+/CD20+ B cells outside GCs resembling interfollicular large B 
cells. In order to gain direct functional evidence that AID+ structures support 
CSR and in situ manufacturing of class-switched ACPA, 34 SCID mice were 
transplanted with RA synovium and humanely killed at 4 wk for harvesting of 
transplants and sera. Persistent expression of AID and Igamma-Cmu circular 
transcripts (identifying ongoing IgM-IgG class-switching) was observed in 
synovial grafts expressing FDCs/CD21L. Furthermore, synovial mRNA levels of AID 
were closely associated with circulating human IgG ACPA in mouse sera. Finally, 
the survival and proliferation of functional B cell niches was associated with 
persistent overexpression of genes regulating ectopic lymphoneogenesis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our demonstration that FDC+ follicular units invariably express AID 
and are surrounded by ACPA-producing plasma cells provides strong evidence that 
ectopic lymphoid structures in the RA synovium are functional and support 
autoantibody production. This concept is further confirmed by evidence of 
sustained AID expression, B cell proliferation, ongoing CSR, and production of 
human IgG ACPA from GC+ synovial tissue transplanted into SCID mice, 
independently of new B cell influx from the systemic circulation. These data 
identify AID as a potential therapeutic target in RA and suggest that survival 
of functional synovial B cell niches may profoundly influence chronic 
inflammation, autoimmunity, and response to B cell-depleting therapies.
