INTRODUCTION: The lymphotoxin-beta receptor (LTbetaR) pathway is important in 
the development and maintenance of lymphoid structures. Blocking this pathway 
has proven beneficial in murine models of autoimmune diseases such as diabetes 
and rheumatoid arthritis. The aim of this study was to determine the effects of 
LTbetaR pathway blockade on Sjögren syndrome (SS)-like salivary gland disease in 
non-obese diabetic (NOD) mice.
METHODS: The course of SS-like disease was followed in NOD mice that were given 
lymphotoxin-beta receptor-immunoglobulin fusion protein (LTbetaR-Ig) starting at 
9 weeks of age. Treatment was given as a single weekly dose for 3, 7, or 10 
weeks. Age-matched NOD mice treated with mouse monoclonal IgG1, or not treated 
at all, were used as controls. The severity of inflammation, cellular 
composition, and lymphoid neogenesis in the submandibular glands were determined 
by immunohistochemistry. Mandibular lymph nodes were also studied. Saliva flow 
rates were measured, and saliva was analyzed by a multiplex cytokine assay. The 
salivary glands were analyzed for CXCL13, CCL19, and CCL21 gene expression by 
quantitative polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: Treatment with LTbetaR-Ig prevented the increase in size and number of 
focal infiltrates normally observed in this SS-like disease. Compared with the 
controls, the submandibular glands of LTbetaR-Ig-treated mice had fewer and 
smaller T- and B-cell zones and fewer high endothelial venules per given 
salivary gland area. Follicular dendritic cell networks were lost in 
LTbetaR-Ig-treated mice. CCL19 expression was also dramatically inhibited in the 
salivary gland infiltrates. Draining lymph nodes showed more gradual changes 
after LTbetaR-Ig treatment. Saliva flow was partially restored in mice treated 
with 10 LTbetaR-Ig weekly injections, and the saliva cytokine profile of these 
mice resembled that of mice in the pre-disease state.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings show that blocking the LTbetaR pathway results in 
ablation of the lymphoid organization in the NOD salivary glands and thus an 
improvement in salivary gland function.
