BACKGROUND: CD23 is a differentiation/activation antigen expressed by a variety 
of hematopoietic and epithelial cells. It can also be detected in soluble forms 
in biological fluids. Initially known as the low-affinity receptor for 
immunoglobulin E (Fc epsilonRII), CD23 displays various other physiologic 
ligands such as CD21, CD11b/c, CD47-vitronectin, and mannose-containing 
proteins. CD23 mediates numerous immune responses by enhancing IgE-specific 
antigen presentation, regulating IgE synthesis, influencing cell differentiation 
and growth of both B- and T-cells. CD23-crosslinking promotes the secretion of 
pro-inflammatory mediators from human monocytes/macrophages, eosinophils and 
epithelial cells. Increased CD23 expression is found in patients during allergic 
reactions and rheumatoid arthritis while its physiopathologic role in these 
diseases remains to be clarified.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We previously generated heptapeptidic 
countrestructures of human CD23. Based on in vitro studies on healthy and 
arthritic patients' cells, we showed that CD23-specific peptide addition to 
human macrophages greatly diminished the transcription of genes encoding 
inflammatory cytokines. This was also confirmed by significant reduction of 
mediator levels in cell supernatants. We also show that CD23 peptide decreased 
IgE-mediated activation of both human and rat CD23(+) macrophages. In vivo 
studies in rat model of arthritis showed that CD23-blocking peptide ameliorates 
clinical scores and prevent bone destruction in a dose dependent manner. Ex-vivo 
analysis of rat macrophages further confirmed the inhibitory effect of peptides 
on their activation. Taken together our results support the role of CD23 
activation and subsequent inflammatory response in arthritis.
CONCLUSION: CD23-blocking peptide (p30A) prevents the activation of 
monocytes/macrophages without cell toxicity. Thus, targeting CD23 by 
antagonistic peptide decreases inflammatory markers and may have clinical value 
in the treatment of human arthritis and allergic reactions involving CD23.
