INTRODUCTION: Bisphosphonates are the most widely used class of drug for 
inhibiting osteoclast-mediated bone loss, but their effectiveness at preventing 
joint destruction in rheumatoid arthritis has generally been disappointing. We 
examined whether the ability of bisphosphonates to induce osteoclast apoptosis 
and inhibit bone resorption in vitro is influenced by the cytokine receptor 
activator of nuclear factor-kappa B ligand (RANKL), an important mediator of 
inflammation-induced bone loss.
METHODS: Rabbit osteoclasts were treated with the bisphosphonates clodronate or 
alendronate for up to 48 hours in the absence or presence of RANKL. Changes in 
cell morphology and induction of apoptosis were examined by scanning electron 
microscopy, whilst resorptive activity was determined by measuring the area of 
resorption cavities. Changes in the level of anti-apoptotic proteins, including 
Mcl-1, Bcl-2, and Bcl-x>L, were determined in rabbit osteoclasts and in 
cytokine-starved mouse osteoclasts by Western blotting.
RESULTS: RANKL significantly attenuated the ability of both clodronate and 
alendronate to induce osteoclast apoptosis and inhibit bone resorption. 
Treatment of rabbit osteoclasts with RANKL was associated with an increase in 
the anti-apoptotic protein Mcl-1 but not Bcl-2. A role for Mcl-1 in osteoclast 
survival was suggested using osteoclasts generated from mouse bone marrow 
macrophages in the presence of RANKL + macrophage colony-stimulating factor 
(M-CSF) since cytokine deprivation of mouse osteoclasts caused a rapid loss of 
Mcl-1 (but not Bcl-2 or Bcl-xL), which preceded the biochemical and 
morphological changes associated with apoptosis. Loss of Mcl-1 from mouse 
osteoclasts could be prevented by factors known to promote osteoclast survival 
(RANKL, M-CSF, tumour necrosis factor-alpha [TNF-alpha], or lipopolysaccharide 
[LPS]).
CONCLUSIONS: RANKL protects osteoclasts from the apoptosis-inducing and 
anti-resorptive effects of bisphosphonates in vitro. The ability of RANKL (and 
other pro-inflammatory factors such as TNF-alpha and LPS) to increase the level 
of Mcl-1 in osteoclasts may explain the lack of effectiveness of some 
bisphosphonates in preventing inflammation-induced bone loss.
