BACKGROUND: A critical component of disease progression in rheumatoid arthritis 
(RA) involves neovascularization associated with pannus formation. 
2-methoxyestradiol (2ME2) is a naturally occurring molecule with no known 
physiologic function, although at pharmacologic concentrations it has 
antiproliferative and antiangiogenic activities. We investigated the impact of 
orally administered 2ME2 on the initiation and development of proliferative 
synovitis using the anti-collagen monoclonal antibodies (CAIA) model.
METHODS: Severe polyarticular arthritis was induced in Balb/c female mice by 
administration of 2 mg of a monoclonal antibody cocktail intravenously into the 
tail vein of mice. Twenty-four hours following monoclonal antibody 
administration, mice were injected with 25 microg of LPS (E. coli strain 
0111:B4) via the intraperitoneal route. Treatment with 2ME2 (100, 75, 50, 25, 
10, 1 mg/kg, p.o., daily), or vehicle control began 24 hrs following LPS 
challenge and continued to day 21. Hind limbs were harvested, sectioned and 
evaluated for DMARD activity and general histopathology by histomorphometric 
analysis and immunohistochemistry (vWF staining). In a separate study, different 
dosing regimens of 2ME2 (100 mg/kg; q.d. vs q.w. vs q.w. x 2) were evaluated. 
The effect of treatment with 2ME2 on gene expression of inflammatory cytokines 
and angiogenic growth factors in the joint space was evaluated 5 and 14 days 
after the induction of arthritis.
RESULTS: Mice treated with 2ME2 beginning 24 hours post anti-collagen monoclonal 
antibody injection, showed a dose-dependent inhibition in mean arthritic scores. 
At study termination (day 21), blinded histomorphometric assessments of 
sectioned hind limbs demonstrated decreases in synovial inflammation, articular 
cartilage degradation, pannus formation, osteoclast activity and bone 
resorption. At the maximal efficacious dosing regimen (100 mg/kg/day), 
administration of 2ME2 resulted in total inhibition of the study parameters and 
prevented neovascularization into the joint. Examination of gene expression on 
dissected hind limbs from mice treated for 5 or 14 days with 2ME2 showed 
inhibition of inflammatory cytokine message for IL-1beta, TNF-alpha, IL-6 and 
IL-17, as well as the angiogenic cytokines, VEGF and FGF-2.
CONCLUSION: These data demonstrate that in the CAIA mouse model of RA, 2ME2 has 
disease modifying activity that is at least partially attributable to the 
inhibition of neovascular development. Further, the data suggests new 
mechanistic points of intervention for 2ME2 in RA, specifically inhibition of 
inflammatory mediators and osteoclast activity.
