BACKGROUND: Chronic inflammation is a key player in pathogenesis. The 
inflammatory cytokine, tumor necrosis factor-alpha is a well known inflammatory 
protein, and has been a therapeutic target for the treatment of diseases such as 
Rheumatoid Arthritis and Crohn's Disease. Obesity is a well known risk factor 
for developing non-insulin dependent diabetes melitus. Adipose tissue has been 
shown to produce tumor necrosis factor-alpha, which has the ability to reduce 
insulin secretion and induce insulin resistance. Based on these observations, we 
sought to investigate the impact of unsaturated fatty acids such as oleic acid 
in the presence of TNF-alpha in terms of insulin production, the molecular 
mechanisms involved and the in vivo effect of a diet high in oleic acid on a 
mouse model of type II diabetes, KKAy.
METHODS: The rat pancreatic beta cell line INS-1 was used as a cell biological 
model since it exhibits glucose dependent insulin secretion. Insulin production 
assessment was carried out using enzyme linked immunosorbent assay and cAMP 
quantification with competitive ELISA. Viability of TNF-alpha and oleic acid 
treated cells was evaluated using flow cytometry. PPAR-gamma translocation was 
assessed using a PPRE based ELISA system. In vivo studies were carried out on 
adult male KKAy mice and glucose levels were measured with a glucometer.
RESULTS: Oleic acid and peanut oil high in oleic acid were able to enhance 
insulin production in INS-1. TNF-alpha inhibited insulin production but 
pre-treatment with oleic acid reversed this inhibitory effect. The viability 
status of INS-1 cells treated with TNF-alpha and oleic acid was not affected. 
Translocation of the peroxisome proliferator- activated receptor transcription 
factor to the nucleus was elevated in oleic acid treated cells. Finally, type II 
diabetic mice that were administered a high oleic acid diet derived from peanut 
oil, had decreased glucose levels compared to animals administered a high fat 
diet with no oleic acid.
CONCLUSION: Oleic acid was found to be effective in reversing the inhibitory 
effect in insulin production of the inflammatory cytokine TNF-alpha. This 
finding is consistent with the reported therapeutic characteristics of other 
monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fatty acids. Furthermore, a diet high in 
oleic acid, which can be easily achieved through consumption of peanuts and 
olive oil, can have a beneficial effect in type II diabetes and ultimately 
reverse the negative effects of inflammatory cytokines observed in obesity and 
non insulin dependent diabetes mellitus.
