INTRODUCTION: Secretory phospholipase A2 (sPLA2) and matrix metalloproteinase 
(MMP) inhibitors are potent modulators of inflammation with therapeutic 
potential, but have limited efficacy in rheumatoid arthritis (RA). The objective 
of this study was to understand the inhibitory mechanism of phospholipase 
inhibitor from python (PIP)-18 peptide in cultured synovial fibroblasts (SF), 
and to evaluate its therapeutic potential in a human tumor necrosis factor 
(hTNF)-driven transgenic mouse (Tg197) model of arthritis.
METHODS: Gene and protein expression of sPLA2-IIA, MMP-1, MMP-2, MMP-3, MMP-9, 
tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase (TIMP)-1, and TIMP-2 were analyzed by real 
time PCR and ELISA respectively, in interleukin (IL)-1beta stimulated rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA) and osteoarthritis (OA) synovial fibroblasts cells treated with 
or without inhibitors of sPLA2 (PIP-18, LY315920) or MMPs (MMP Inhibitor II). 
Phosphorylation status of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) proteins was 
examined by cell-based ELISA. The effect of PIP-18 was compared with that of 
celecoxib, methotrexate, infliximab and antiflamin-2 in Tg197 mice after ip 
administration (thrice weekly for 5 weeks) at two doses (10, 30 mg/kg), and 
histologic analysis of ankle joints. Serum sPLA2 and cytokines (tumor necrosis 
factor (TNF)alpha, IL-6) were measured by Escherichia coli (E coli) assay and 
ELISA, respectively.
RESULTS: PIP-18 inhibited sPLA2-IIA production and enzymatic activity, and 
suppressed production of MMPs in IL-1beta-induced RA and OA SF cells. Treatment 
with PIP-18 blocked IL-1beta-induced p38 MAPK phosphorylation and resulted in 
attenuation of sPLA2-IIA and MMP mRNA transcription in RA SF cells. The disease 
modifying effect of PIP-18 was evidenced by significant abrogation of synovitis, 
cartilage degradation and bone erosion in hTNF Tg197 mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate the benefit that can be gained from using 
sPLA2 inhibitory peptide for RA treatment, and validate PIP-18 as a potential 
therapeutic in a clinically relevant animal model of human arthritis.
