INTRODUCTION: In this article, we present a comparative immunohistochemical 
evaluation of four clinical-stage antibodies (L19, F16, G11 and F8) directed 
against splice isoforms of fibronectin and of tenascin-C for their ability to 
stain synovial tissue alterations in rheumatoid arthritis patients. Furthermore 
we have evaluated the therapeutic potential of the most promising antibody, F8, 
fused to the anti-inflammatory cytokine interleukin (IL) 10.
METHODS: F8-IL10 was produced and purified to homogeneity in CHO cells and shown 
to comprise biological active antibody and cytokine moieties by binding assays 
on recombinant antigen and by MC/9 cell proliferation assays. We have also 
characterized the ability of F8-IL10 to inhibit arthritis progression in the 
collagen-induced arthritis mouse model.
RESULTS: The human antibody F8, specific to the extra-domain A of fibronectin, 
exhibited the strongest and most homogenous staining pattern in synovial 
biopsies and was thus selected for the development of a fully human fusion 
protein with IL10 (F8-IL10, also named DEKAVIL). Following radioiodination, 
F8-IL10 was able to selectively target arthritic lesions and tumor neo-vascular 
structures in mice, as evidenced by autoradiographic analysis and quantitative 
biodistribution studies. The subcutaneous administration route led to equivalent 
targeting results when compared with intravenous administration and was thus 
selected for the clinical development of the product. F8-IL10 potently inhibited 
progression of established arthritis in the collagen-induced mouse model when 
tested alone and in combination with methotrexate. In preparation for clinical 
trials in patients with rheumatoid arthritis, F8-IL10 was studied in rodents and 
in cynomolgus monkeys, revealing an excellent safety profile at doses tenfold 
higher than the planned starting dose for clinical phase I trials.
CONCLUSIONS: Following the encouraging preclinical results presented in this 
paper, clinical trials with F8-IL10 will now elucidate the therapeutic potential 
of this product and whether the targeted delivery of IL10 potentiates the 
anti-arthritic action of the cytokine in rheumatoid arthritis patients.
