ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Saussurea involucrata (Kar. et Kir.) Sch.-Bip. 
(Compositae) has long been used under the herbal name "Snow Lotus" for the 
treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, stomachache and dysmenorrhea in Uighur folk 
medicine. In traditional Tibetan medicine, Saussurea laniceps Hand.-Mazz. and 
Saussurea medusa Maxim. have also been used under the name "Snow Lotus" and 
prescribed for the treatment of pain and inflammatory conditions.
AIM OF THE STUDY: The present study evaluated the pharmacological effects of 
three species of "Snow Lotus" in experimental inflammation and pain models, and 
determined the chemical compounds that may correlate with their pharmacological 
activities.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The anti-inflammatory activities of the three herbs were 
observed by using carrageenan-induced paw edema in rats and xylene-induced ear 
edema in mice. Investigations on the analgesic effects were conducted, including 
acetic acid-induced writhing and hot-plate test. An UPLC-MS method was developed 
to analyze the chemical composition of the three herbs and of plasma samples 
after herb administration.
RESULTS: In rat paw edema model, the peak inhibitory effects of Saussurea 
laniceps and Saussurea involucrata (55.1% and 42.2%, respectively) were recorded 
with the dose of 400mg/kg at 3h post-carrageenan injection. In mouse ear edema 
model, oral administration of Saussurea laniceps, Saussurea involucrata and 
Saussurea medusa extract (400mg/kg) resulted in a significant inhibition of ear 
edema by 40.9%, 33.3%, and 9.1%, respectively. In the writhing test, oral 
administration of Saussurea laniceps extract (100, 200 and 400mg/kg) resulted in 
a significant inhibition of writhings by 13.5%, 22.3%, and 43.5%, respectively. 
In the hot-plate test, Saussurea laniceps extract significantly increased the 
latency of jumping response by 38.2% and 52.7% when treated orally at 200 and 
400mg/kg in mice, respectively. Flavonoids, coumarins and lignins were found to 
be present in plasma after administration of the extracts and may be the basis 
of the observed pharmacological effects.
CONCLUSION: The results clearly demonstrated that Saussurea laniceps was most 
effective; Saussurea involucrata exhibited a moderate potency, whereas Saussurea 
medusa possessed little effect against the experimental edema and pains. This 
study also supported discrimination among the three herbs when using them in 
folk medicine.
