OBJECTIVE: Interleukin-27 (IL-27) has stimulatory and regulatory immune 
functions and is expressed in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) synovium. This study was 
undertaken to investigate the effects of IL-27 on human osteoclastogenesis, to 
determine whether IL-27 can stimulate or attenuate the osteoclast-mediated bone 
resorption that is a hallmark of RA.
METHODS: Osteoclasts were generated from blood-derived human CD14+ cells. The 
effects of IL-27 on osteoclast formation were evaluated by counting the number 
of tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase-positive multinucleated cells and 
measuring the expression of osteoclast-related genes. The induction of nuclear 
factor of activated T cells c1 (NFATc1) and the activation of signaling pathways 
downstream of RANK were measured by immunoblotting. The expression of key 
molecules implicated in osteoclastogenesis (NFATc1, RANK, costimulatory 
receptors, and immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif-harboring adaptor 
proteins) was measured by real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain 
reaction. Murine osteoclast precursors obtained from mouse bone marrow and 
synovial fluid macrophages derived from RA patients were also tested for their 
responsiveness to IL-27.
RESULTS: IL-27 inhibited human osteoclastogenesis, suppressed the induction of 
NFATc1, down-regulated the expression of RANK and triggering receptor expressed 
on myeloid cells 2 (TREM-2), and inhibited RANKL-mediated activation of ERK, 
p38, and NF-kappaB in osteoclast precursors. Synovial fluid macrophages from RA 
patients were refractory to the effects of IL-27. In contrast to the findings in 
humans, IL-27 only moderately suppressed murine osteoclastogenesis, and this was 
likely attributable to low expression of the IL-27 receptor subunit WSX-1 on 
murine osteoclast precursors.
CONCLUSION: IL-27 inhibits human osteoclastogenesis by a direct mechanism that 
suppresses the responses of osteoclast precursors to RANKL. These findings 
suggest that, in addition to its well-known antiinflammatory effects, IL-27 
plays a homeostatic role in restraining bone erosion. This homeostatic function 
is compromised under conditions of chronic inflammation such as in RA synovitis.
