INTRODUCTION: Tyrosine kinases are key mediators of multiple signaling pathways 
implicated in rheumatoid arthritis (RA). We previously demonstrated that 
imatinib mesylate--a Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved, antineoplastic 
drug that potently inhibits the tyrosine kinases Abl, c-Kit, platelet-derived 
growth factor receptor (PDGFR), and c-Fms--ameliorates murine autoimmune 
arthritis. However, which of the imatinib-targeted kinases is the principal 
culprit in disease pathogenesis remains unknown. Here we examine the role of 
c-Fms in autoimmune arthritis.
METHODS: We tested the therapeutic efficacy of orally administered imatinib or 
GW2580, a small molecule that specifically inhibits c-Fms, in three mouse models 
of RA: collagen-induced arthritis (CIA), anti-collagen antibody-induced 
arthritis (CAIA), and K/BxN serum transfer-induced arthritis (K/BxN). Efficacy 
was evaluated by visual scoring of arthritis severity, paw thickness 
measurements, and histological analysis. We assessed the in vivo effects of 
imatinib and GW2580 on macrophage infiltration of synovial joints in CIA, and 
their in vitro effects on macrophage and osteoclast differentiation, and on 
osteoclast-mediated bone resorption. Further, we determined the effects of 
imatinib and GW2580 on the ability of macrophage colony-stimulating factor 
(M-CSF; the ligand for c-Fms) to prime bone marrow-derived macrophages to 
produce tumor necrosis factor (TNF) upon subsequent Fc receptor ligation. 
Finally, we measured M-CSF levels in synovial fluid from patients with RA, 
osteoarthritis (OA), or psoriatic arthritis (PsA), and levels of total and 
phosphorylated c-Fms in synovial tissue from patients with RA.
RESULTS: GW2580 was as efficacious as imatinib in reducing arthritis severity in 
CIA, CAIA, and K/BxN models of RA. Specific inhibition of c-Fms abrogated (i) 
infiltration of macrophages into synovial joints of arthritic mice; (ii) 
differentiation of monocytes into macrophages and osteoclasts; (iii) 
osteoclast-mediated bone resorption; and (iv) priming of macrophages to produce 
TNF upon Fc receptor stimulation, an important trigger of synovitis in RA. 
Expression and activation of c-Fms in RA synovium were high, and levels of M-CSF 
were higher in RA synovial fluid than in OA or PsA synovial fluid.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that c-Fms plays a central role in the 
pathogenesis of RA by mediating the differentiation and priming of monocyte 
lineage cells. Therapeutic targeting of c-Fms could provide benefit in RA.
