INTRODUCTION: Pristane-induced arthritis (PIA) in the rat has been described as 
an animal model of inflammatory arthritis which exhibits features similar to 
rheumatoid arthritis in humans, such as a chronic, destructive, and symmetrical 
involvement of peripheral joints. However, so far little is known about the 
earliest inflammatory events and their influence on locomotor behaviour during 
the course of PIA. To investigate this issue a detailed analysis of the 
pathologic changes occurring during the prodromal and early stages of PIA was 
performed.
METHODS: Arthritis was induced in DA.rats by injection of 150 microl 
2,6,10,4-tetramethyl-pentadecane (pristane) at the base of the tail and changes 
in locomotor behaviour of the affected paws were monitored using the CatWalk 
quantitative gait analysis system. The pathologic events occurring in the joints 
of pristane-injected animals were studied before onset, at onset, and during 
acute phase of arthritis by histological methods.
RESULTS: Gait analysis revealed that changes in locomotion such as reduced paw 
print areas and stance phase time are already apparent before the onset of 
clinically discernible arthritis symptoms (erythema, paw swelling) and correlate 
with PIA scores. In agreement with these findings, inflammatory tenosynovitis 
could be observed by histology already before the onset of erythema and swelling 
of the respective paws. In the most heavily affected rats also irregularities in 
step sequence patterns occurred A kinetic analysis of clinical and histological 
findings demonstrated that gait changes precede the pathological changes 
occurring during the acute phase of pristane-induced arthritis.
CONCLUSIONS: Gait analysis allows for pinpointing the initial inflammatory 
changes in experimental arthritis models such as pristane-induced arthritis. 
Analysis of early clinically relevant symptoms in arthritis models may 
facilitate the search for novel therapeutics to interfere with pain, 
inflammation and joint destruction in patients suffering from inflammatory 
arthritis.
