OBJECTIVE: To report the use of rituximab to treat thyroid-associated 
orbitopathy (TAO) in a patient with a concomitant B-cell organ-specific 
autoimmune disorder-the stiff person syndrome (SPS).
METHODS: We present a case report and a review of the related literature.
RESULTS: A 62-year-old man with SPS, latent autoimmune diabetes of the adult, 
and Graves-Basedow disease was referred to our medical center because of 
bilateral TAO. An ophthalmologic examination documented asymmetric bilateral 
NOSPECS (N = no signs or symptoms; O = only signs, no symptoms; S = soft tissue 
involvement; P = proptosis; E = extraocular muscle involvement; C = corneal 
involvement; and S = sight loss) class IV TAO (left eye>right eye) with a 
clinical activity score of 5 on a scale of 7. Magnetic resonance imaging of the 
orbits documented bilateral exophthalmos (left eye>right eye) due to retrobulbar 
fibroadipose infiltration, bilateral increase of extrinsic ocular muscle 
thickness, and enhancement of the left inferior rectus muscle on T2-weighted 
sequences. Because of concomitant incapacitating SPS and diet-controlled latent 
autoimmune diabetes of the adult, we excluded long-term corticosteroid therapy 
as an option and considered the use of rituximab, a mouse-human chimeric 
monoclonal antibody targeting the CD20 protein on pre-B and mature B 
lymphocytes. Rituximab was administered in accordance with the protocol for 
rheumatoid arthritis. During the subsequent 4 months, clinical signs and 
symptoms of TAO dramatically resolved (clinical activity score = 0 of 7) with a 
sustained improvement of the spastic paraparesis. The glutamic acid 
decarboxylase antibody titer remained high, and glycemic control and first-phase 
insulin secretion did not change.
CONCLUSION: Treatment of active TAO with rituximab should be considered when 
standard intravenous pulse glucocorticoid treatment is contraindicated or 
ineffective and when SPS or other organ-specific autoimmune disorders with 
involvement of humoral autoimmunity are present, inasmuch as more than 1 disease 
may benefit from the use of this chimeric monoclonal antibody.
