* Author for correspondence and reprint requests Z. Naturforsch. 65c, 141-147 
(2010); received June 17/July 21, 2009 The superoxide radical (O2-), hydrogen 
peroxide (H2O2) and nitric oxide (NO) are pleiotropic inflammatory mediators 
which play an important role in inflammatory joint diseases. They are 
overproduced during rheumatoid arthritis and its experimental model - 
adjuvant-induced arthritis in rodents--and may be detected both systemically and 
intra-articularly. Their secretion is up-regulated by proinflammatory cytokines 
such as IFN-gamma, IL-12, IL-6 and TNF-alpha, and they are responsible for the 
destruction of joint tissue. In this work, the effect of superoxide dismutase 
(SOD) from a thermotolerant yeast strain, Kluyveromyces marxianus, on the 
production of proinflammatory cytokines, reactive oxygen and nitrogen species 
was studied. Mice received three intraperitoneal injections of yeast SOD at a 
dose of 10 mg/ kg body weight (30,000 U/kg) on consecutive days starting on the 
day after arthritic induction. On days 3, 8 and 14 post induction peritoneal 
macrophages were isolated and both spontaneous and stimulated production of 
reactive oxygen and nitrogen metabolites were measured. Early in arthritic 
development yeast SOD treatment did not influence the O2- production, but on day 
14 both spontaneous and PMA-induced secretion were dramatically reduced. 
Spontaneous H2O2 release was inhibited on day 14, while PMA-stimulated 
production was decreased from the beginning of the arthritic development. Yeast 
SOD treatment effectively suppressed the spontaneous and recombinant mouse 
IFN-gamma + LPS induced release of NO as well. Serum levels of proinflammatory 
cytokines, IL-12, IFN-gamma, IL-6 and TNF-alpha, were also significantly 
reduced. The obtained results show some of the mechanisms of action of SOD in 
reducing the severity of arthritic inflammation. Besides direct inhibition of 
joint tissue destruction exogenous SOD substantially limits the existing 
positive feedback between secretion of reactive oxygen species and inflammatory 
cytokine production.
