BACKGROUND: Tolerance to collagen structures has been shown to inhibit the 
progression of autoimmune scleroderma and rheumatoid arthritis. More recently, 
tolerance induction to collagen type V (colV) in experimental models of lung 
transplantation was shown to ameliorate the complex pathology known as "chronic 
rejection." The link between colV autoimmunity and progressive graft dysfunction 
and subsequent development of bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome (BOS) has been 
established in human lung transplant recipients. We hypothesized that 
intravenous injection of colV inhibits development of lung fibrosis in a 
bleomycin-induced lung injury mouse model.
METHODS: Experimental animals were injected intravenously with saline or colV 10 
days before intratracheal instillation of bleomycin. Pulmonary inflammation was 
monitored and quantified for the presence of cells in the bronchoalveolar lavage 
(BAL) fluid by flow cytometry and histology of lung tissue.
RESULTS: ColV-pre-treated animals showed a significant reduction in lung 
inflammation compared with non-treated animals, according to histology and 
morphometry. The number of inflammatory cells in the BAL fluid was significantly 
reduced and associated with a lower proportion of gammadelta T cells and CD4(+) 
T cells in the colV-pre-treated group. Matrix metalloproteinase-2 and -9 (MMP-2 
and -9; also known as gelatinase A and gelatinase B, respectively) levels in the 
BAL fluid were significantly reduced in colV-pre-treated mice compared with the 
non-treated mice. In addition, intravenous injection of colV was associated with 
a significant reduction in the relative expression of interleukin (IL)-6, IL-17 
and IL-22 in cells present in BAL fluid at 7 and 14 days after bleomycin 
instillation.
CONCLUSIONS: Pre-treatment by intravenous injection of colV inhibits 
bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis by inhibiting IL-6 and IL-17 production. 
Fibrosis treatment in this context therefore should target induction of colV 
tolerance and Th17 development.

Copyright (c) 2010 International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation. 
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
