Cyclophosphamide (CP) is widely used in the treatment of cancer and 
non-malignant disease states such as rheumatoid arthritis. Hemorrhagic cystitis 
is a major dose-limiting side effect of CP. The incidence of this side effect is 
related to the dosage and can be as high as 75%. Elimination of the side effects 
of CP can lead to better tolerance of the drug, and a more efficient therapy can 
be achieved for patients in need of CP treatment. Several studies have 
demonstrated that oxidative stress and neutrophil infiltration play important 
roles in CP-induced bladder damage. Glutamine is utilized under clinical 
conditions for preventing chemotherapeutic drug-induced side effects, based on 
its ability to attenuate oxidative stress. The aim of the study is to verify 
whether glutamine prevents CP-induced oxidative stress and bladder damage using 
a rat model. Adult male rats were administered 150 mg/kg body weight of CP 
intraperitoneally. Glutamine pretreated rats were administered 1 g/kg body 
weight of glutamine orally 2 h before the administration of CP. 
Vehicle/glutamine-treated rats served as controls. All the rats were killed 16 h 
after the dose of CP/vehicle. The urinary bladders were removed and used for 
light microscopic and biochemical studies. The markers of oxidative stress 
including malondialdehyde content, protein carbonyl content, protein thiol, and 
myeloperoxidase activity, a marker of neutrophil infiltration, were measured in 
bladder homogenates. CP treatment induced hemorrhagic cystitis in the rats. 
Pretreatment with glutamine significantly reduced CP-induced lipid peroxidation 
(p < 0.01), protein oxidation (p < 0.01), and increase in myeloperoxidase 
activity (p < 0.05). However, it did not prevent CP-induced bladder damage. The 
results of the present study show that glutamine pretreatment does not attenuate 
CP-induced hemorrhagic cystitis, although it prevents CP-induced oxidative 
stress and neutrophil infiltration significantly. It is therefore necessary to 
clarify the utility of glutamine as a chemoprotective agent before it is 
recommended in the market as a nutrient supplement.
