INTRODUCTION: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a T-cell-mediated systemic autoimmune 
disease, characterized by synovium inflammation and articular destruction. Bone 
marrow mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) could be effective in the treatment of 
several autoimmune diseases. However, there has been thus far no report on 
umbilical cord (UC)-MSCs in the treatment of RA. Here, potential 
immunosuppressive effects of human UC-MSCs in RA were evaluated.
METHODS: The effects of UC-MSCs on the responses of fibroblast-like synoviocytes 
(FLSs) and T cells in RA patients were explored. The possible molecular 
mechanism mediating this immunosuppressive effect of UC-MSCs was explored by 
addition of inhibitors to indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO), Nitric oxide (NO), 
prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), transforming growth factor β1 (TGF-β1) and interleukin 
10 (IL-10). The therapeutic effects of systemic infusion of human UC-MSCs on 
collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) in a mouse model were explored.
RESULTS: In vitro, UC-MSCs were capable of inhibiting proliferation of FLSs from 
RA patients, via IL-10, IDO and TGF-β1. Furthermore, the invasive behavior and 
IL-6 secretion of FLSs were also significantly suppressed. On the other hand, 
UC-MSCs induced hyporesponsiveness of T cells mediated by PGE2, TGF-β1 and NO 
and UC-MSCs could promote the expansion of CD4(+) Foxp3(+) regulatory T cells 
from RA patients. More importantly, systemic infusion of human UC-MSCs reduced 
the severity of CIA in a mouse model. Consistently, there were reduced levels of 
proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines (TNF-α, IL-6 and monocyte 
chemoattractant protein-1) and increased levels of the 
anti-inflammatory/regulatory cytokine (IL-10) in sera of UC-MSCs treated mice. 
Moreover, such treatment shifted Th1/Th2 type responses and induced Tregs in 
CIA.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, human UC-MSCs suppressed the various inflammatory 
effects of FLSs and T cells of RA in vitro, and attenuated the development of 
CIA in vivo, strongly suggesting that UC-MSCs might be a therapeutic strategy in 
RA. In addition, the immunosuppressive activitiy of UC-MSCs could be prolonged 
by the participation of Tregs.
