Imatinib and nilotinib are inhibitors that selectively target a set of protein 
tyrosine kinases, including abelson kinase (Abl), together with the chimeric 
oncoprotein, breakpoint cluster region-abelson kinase (Bcr-Abl), as well as stem 
cell factor receptor (KIT), platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR), 
discoidin domain receptor (DDR), and colony stimulating factor-1 receptor 
(CSF-1R). The aim of the present study was to investigate whether imatinib or 
nilotinib was effective against arthritis in the glucose-6-phosphate isomerase 
(GPI)-induced arthritis mouse model. Imatinib or nilotinib was administered 
orally to the arthritic mice at different time points. Efficacy was evaluated by 
visual scoring and by determining the production of anti-GPI antibody. 
Splenocytes from the arthritic mice were cultured with GPI in the presence of 
imatinib or nilotinib in vitro, and cytokine levels in the culture supernatants 
were analyzed. To investigate the effects of imatinib and nilotinib on T-cell 
proliferation, lymph node cells from the arthritic mice were cultured with GPI 
in the presence of imatinib or nilotinib in vitro. Interleukin (IL)-17 mRNA 
expression in the arthritic ankle joints from the onset of arthritis was 
analyzed by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). The administration of 
imatinib from day 0 showed suppression of arthritis (P < 0.05), the 
administration of nilotinib from day 0 resulted in pronounced suppression of 
arthritis (P < 0.01), and that from day 7 showed significant inhibition of the 
progression of arthritis (P < 0.05). A reduction in anti-GPI antibodies was 
correlated with the therapeutic efficacy of imatinib, but not with that of 
nilotinib. Imatinib dose-dependently inhibited tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, 
IL-6, interferon (IFN)-γ, and IL-17 production by splenocytes in vitro, while 
nilotinib inhibited only IL-17 and IFN-γ production in a dose-dependent fashion. 
Imatinib at 3 μM exerted a mild antiproliferative effect on CD4+ T cells (P < 
0.05), whereas imatinib at 10 μM and nilotinib at 3 and 10 μM demonstrated a 
marked antiproliferative effect (P < 0.01). The IL17 gene expression level on 
day 7 tended to be higher than that on day 14. These findings suggest that 
imatinib and nilotinib could prevent autoimmune arthritis, essentially via 
distinct mechanisms, in that imatinib inhibits both inflammatory and 
T-cell-derived cytokine production, whereas nilotinib suppresses T-cell-derived 
cytokine production. Imatinib and nilotinib could have therapeutic potential for 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and other inflammatory diseases.
