BACKGROUND: Mast cells (MCs) have a central role in the induction of allergic 
inflammation, such as seen in asthma, and contribute to the severity of certain 
autoimmune diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis. The MC thus represents an 
important inflammatory cell, and one which has resisted therapeutic attempts to 
alter its role in disease.
OBJECTIVE: Because bone marrow-derived stromal cells (BMSC, also known as 
mesenchymal stem cells or MSCs) have been reported to alter allergic 
inflammation in vivo, we chose to study the interaction between mouse BMSC and 
mouse bone marrow-derived MCs.
METHODS: MC degranulation, cytokine production and chemotaxis were evaluated in 
vitro following co-culture with BMSCs either in cell contact or a transwell. In 
addition, MC degranulation was assessed in vivo following administration of 
BMSCs in a model of passive cutaneous anaphylaxis and a peritoneal degranulation 
assay. Mechanisms of MC suppression by BMSCs were determined through use of 
inhibitors or antibodies to COX1, COX2, nitric oxide, indoleamine 2, 
3-dioxygenase, EP1-4 receptors, TGF-β and IL-10. Lastly, we utilized either 
BMSCs or MCs deficient in COX1, COX2 or EP1-4 receptors to confirm the 
mechanisms of inhibition of MC function by BMSCs.
RESULTS: We discovered that BMSCs will effectively suppress specific MC 
functions in vitro as well as in vivo. When MCs are cocultured with BMSCs to 
allow cell-to-cell contact, BMSCs suppressed MC degranulation, pro-inflammatory 
cytokine production, chemokinesis and chemotaxis. Similarly, MC degranulation 
within mouse skin or the peritoneal cavity was suppressed following in vivo 
administration of BMSCs. Further, we found that these inhibitory effects were 
dependent on up-regulation of COX2 in BMSCs; and were facilitated through the 
activation of EP4 receptors on MCs.
CONCLUSION AND CLINICAL RELEVANCE: These observations support the concept that 
BMSCs have the ability to suppress MC activation and therefore could be the 
basis for a novel cell based therapeutic approach in the treatment of MC driven 
inflammatory diseases.
