OBJECTIVE: Rheumatoid arthritis culminates in joint destruction that, in mouse 
models of disease, is supported by innate immune molecules, including Fcγ 
receptors (FcγR) and complement. However, these findings may not be predictive 
of the outcome in humans, given the structural differences between murine and 
human activating FcγR on neutrophils, a prominent component of joint exudates. 
The aim of this study was to examine the role of human neutrophil FcγRIIa in the 
development of arthritis and probe the underlying mechanism by which FcγRIIa 
initiates disease.
METHODS: K/BxN mouse serum transfer-induced arthritis was examined in mice 
expressing human FcγRIIa on neutrophils but lacking their own activating FcγR 
(γ-chain-deficient mice). The role of mast cells, complement (C3 and C5a), and 
CD18 integrins in FcγRIIa-initiated disease was examined using cell 
reconstitution approaches, inhibitors, and functional blocking antibodies, 
respectively. Crosstalk between the complement receptor C5aR and FcγRIIa on 
neutrophils was evaluated in vitro.
RESULTS: The expression of human FcγRIIa on neutrophils was sufficient to 
restore susceptibility to K/BxN serum-induced neutrophil recruitment, synovitis, 
and bone destruction in γ-chain-deficient mice. Joint inflammation was robust 
and proceeded even in the absence of mast cells and vascular permeability, 
features shown to contribute to disease in wild-type mice. Neutrophil 
recruitment was dependent on the presence of a CD18 integrin, lymphocyte 
function-associated antigen 1, and C5aR. In addition, C5aR significantly 
enhanced FcγRIIa-mediated phagocytosis and oxidative burst in vitro.
CONCLUSION: Human and murine activating FcγR on neutrophils are not functionally 
equivalent, and in humans, they may play a primary role in arthritis. Crosstalk 
between neutrophil C5aR and FcγRIIa is essential for disease progression, thus 
highlighting a new aspect of complement during the effector phase of 
inflammatory arthritis.
