INTRODUCTION: Collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) is a mouse model for rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA) and is induced after immunization with type II collagen (CII). 
CIA, like RA, is an autoimmune disease leading to destruction of cartilage and 
joints, and both the priming and inflammatory phases have been suggested to be 
dependent on proteases. In particular, the cysteine proteases have been proposed 
to be detrimental to the arthritic process and even immunomodulatory. A natural 
inhibitor of cysteine proteases is cystatin C.
METHODS: Cystatin C-deficient, sufficient and heterozygous mice were tested for 
onset, incidence and severity of CIA. The effect of cystatin C-deficiency was 
further dissected by testing the inflammatory effector phase of CIA; that is, 
collagen antibody-induced arthritis model and priming phase, that is, T cell 
response both in vivo and in vitro. In addition, in order to determine the 
importance of T cells and antigen-presenting cells (APCs), these cell 
populations were separated and in vitro T cell responses determined in a mixed 
co-culture system. Finally, flow cytometry was used in order to further 
characterize cell populations in cystatin C-deficient mice.
RESULTS: Here, we show that mice lacking cystatin C, develop arthritis at a 
higher incidence and an earlier onset than wild-type controls. Interestingly, 
when the inflammatory phase of CIA was examined independently from immune 
priming then cystatin C-deficiency did not enhance the arthritis profile. 
However, in line with the enhanced CIA, there was an increased T cell and B cell 
response as delayed-type hypersensitivity reaction and anti-CII antibody titers 
were elevated in the cystatin C-deficient mice after immunization. In addition, 
the ex vivo naïve APCs from cystatin C-deficient mice had a greater capacity to 
stimulate T cells. Interestingly, dendritic cells had a more activated phenotype 
in naïve cystatin C-deficient mice.
CONCLUSIONS: The lack of cystatin C enhances CIA and primarily affects in vivo 
priming of the immune system. Although the mechanism of this is still unknown, 
we show evidence for a more activated APC compartment, which would elevate the 
autoimmune response towards CII, thus resulting in an enhanced development of 
chronic arthritis.
