BACKGROUND: Human T-cell leukemia virus type I (HTLV-1) can cause an aggressive 
malignancy known as adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma (ATL) as well as inflammatory 
diseases such as HTLV-1-associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis 
(HAM/TSP). A transgenic mouse that expresses HTLV-1 Tax also develops T-cell 
leukemia/lymphoma and an inflammatory arthropathy that resembles rheumatoid 
arthritis. The aim of this study was to identify the primary T-cell subsets 
involved in the development of arthropathy in Tax transgenic mice.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: By 24 months of age, Tax transgenic mice developed severe 
arthropathy with a cumulative incidence of 22.8%. The pathological findings of 
arthropathy in Tax transgenic mice were similar to those seen in human 
rheumatoid arthritis or mouse models of rheumatoid arthritis, with synovial 
proliferation and a positive rheumatoid factor. Before the onset of spontaneous 
arthropathy, young and old Tax transgenic mice were not sensitive to collagen 
and did not develop arthritis after immunization with type II collagen. The 
arthropathic Tax transgenic mice showed a significantly decreased proportion of 
splenic CD4(+) T cells, whereas the proportion of splenic CD8(+) T cells was 
increased. Regulatory T cells (CD4(+)CD25(+)Foxp3(+)) were significantly 
decreased and CD8(+) T cells that expressed the chemokine receptor CCR4 
(CD8(+)CCR4(+)) were significantly increased in arthropathic Tax transgenic 
mice. The expression of tax mRNA was strong in the spleen and joints of 
arthropathic mice, with a 40-fold increase compared with healthy transgenic 
mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings reveal that Tax transgenic mice develop 
rheumatoid-like arthritis with proliferating synovial cells in the joints; 
however, the proportion of different splenic T-cell subsets in these mice was 
completely different from other commonly used animal models of rheumatoid 
arthritis. The crucial T-cell subsets in arthropathic Tax transgenic mice appear 
to resemble those in HAM/TSP patients rather than those in rheumatoid arthritis 
patients.
