OBJECTIVE: To observe the influence of moxibustion of "Shenshu"(BL 23) and 
"Zusanli" (ST 36) on the microstructure of synovial cells in the knee-joint in 
rheumatoidarthritis (RA) rats so as to study its underlying mechanism in 
anti-inflammatory immune effect.
METHODS: A total of 120 Wistar rats were randomized into normal control, model, 
acupuncture, moxibustion, CO2-laser and medication groups (n = 20/group). RA 
model was duplicated by raising the rats in a windy (electro-fan blowing), cold 
[(6 +/- 2) degrees] and wet (80%-90%) environment for 12 h/d and 20 days, 
followed by injecting Freund's complete adjuvant (0.15 mL) into the rat's ankle. 
Moxibustion or acupuncture or CO2 laser (10.6 microm) irradiation was applied to 
"Shenshu" (BL 23) and "Zusanli" (ST 36) for 20 min, once daily for 15 days. 
Intragastric perfusion of Leigongteng (Tripterygium Wilfordii Hook.f.) was given 
to medication group, 8 mg/kg, once daily for 15 days. The thoracic gland index 
[weight of the thoracic gland (mg)/ body weight (g) x 100%] and spleen index 
[weight of the spleen (mg)/body weight (g) x 100%] were calculated after killing 
the rats under anesthesia. The ultrastructure of synovial cells of the 
knee-joint was observed by using transmission electron microscopy.
RESULTS: In comparison with the normal control group, the thoracic gland index 
in the model group was decreased significantly (P < 0.01), while the spleen 
index of the model group increased considerably (P < 0.05). In comparison with 
the model group, the thoracic gland indexes in the acupuncture, moxibustion, 
CO-laser and medication groups were increased significantly (P < 0.05, P < 
0.01), whereas the spleen indexes in the four groups decreased evidently (P < 
0.05). No significant differences were found among the acupuncture, moxibustion, 
CO2-laser and medication groups in up-regulating the thoracic gland index and 
down-regulating the spleen index (P > 0.05). After modeling, the synoviocytes of 
the knee-joint were impaired remarkably, exhibiting incomplete cellular 
membrane, some prolapsed organelles, marginalized stained granules in the 
cellular nucleus, vague nuclear membrane, enlarged rough endoplasmic reticulum, 
reduction in the number of mitochondria with vacuolization degeneration and 
multiple lysosomes. But, the pathological changes of the ultrastructure of most 
synoviocytes in the acupuncture, moxibustion, CO2-laser and medication groups 
were relatively milder.
CONCLUSION: Moxibustion can protect the immune organs (thoracic gland and 
spleen) from injury and improve pathological changes of the ultrastructure of 
local synoviocytes in RA rats.
