INTRODUCTION: Mouse models of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) have proven critical for 
identifying genetic and cellular mechanisms of the disease. Upon discovering 
mice in our breeding colony that had spontaneously developed inflamed joints 
reminiscent of RA, we established the novel IIJ (inherited inflamed joints) 
strain. The purpose of this study was to characterize the histopathological, 
clinical, genetic and immunological properties of the disease.
METHODS: To begin the IIJ strain, an arthritic male mouse was crossed with SJL/J 
females. Inheritance of the phenotype was then tracked by intercrossing, 
backcrossing and outcrossing to other inbred strains. The histopathology of the 
joints and extraarticular organ systems was examined. Serum cytokines and 
immunoglobulins (Igs) were measured by ELISA and cytometric bead array. Transfer 
experiments tested whether disease could be mediated by serum alone. Finally, 
the cellular joint infiltrate and the composition of secondary lymphoid organs 
were examined by immunohistochemistry and flow cytometry.
RESULTS: After nine generations of intercrossing, the total incidence of 
arthritis was 33% (304 of 932 mice), with females being affected more than males 
(38% vs. 28%; P < 0.001). Swelling, most notably in the large distal joints, 
typically became evident at an early age (mean age of 52 days). In addition to 
the joint pathology, which included bone and cartilage erosion, synovial 
hyperproliferation and a robust cellular infiltration of mostly Gr-1(+) 
neutrophils, there was also evidence of systemic inflammation. IL-6 was elevated 
in the sera of recently arthritic mice, and extraarticular inflammation was 
observed histologically in multiple organs. Total serum Ig and IgG1 levels were 
significantly elevated in arthritic mice, and autoantibodies such as rheumatoid 
factor and Ig reactive to joint components (collagen type II and joint 
homogenate) were also detected. Nevertheless, serum failed to transfer disease. 
A high percentage of double-negative (CD4(-)CD8(-)) CD3(+) TCRα/β(+) T cells in 
the lymphoid organs of arthritic IIJ mice suggested significant disruption in 
the T-cell compartment.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, these data identify the IIJ strain as a new murine model 
of inflammatory, possibly autoimmune, arthritis. The IIJ strain is similar, both 
histologically and serologically, to RA and other murine models of autoimmune 
arthritis. It may prove particularly useful for understanding the female bias in 
autoimmune diseases.
