INTRODUCTION: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic autoimmune disease with 
episodic flares in affected joints. However, how arthritic flare occurs only in 
select joints during a systemic autoimmune disease remains an enigma. To better 
understand these observations, we developed longitudinal imaging outcomes of 
synovitis and lymphatic flow in mouse models of RA, and identified that 
asymmetric knee flare is associated with ipsilateral popliteal lymph node (PLN) 
collapse and the translocation of CD23(+)/CD21(hi) B-cells (B-in) into the 
paracortical sinus space of the node. In order to understand the relationship 
between this B-in translocation and lymph drainage from flaring joints, we 
tested the hypothesis that asymmetric tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-induced knee 
arthritis is associated with ipsilateral PLN and iliac lymph node (ILN) 
collapse, B-in translocation, and decreased afferent lymphatic flow.
METHODS: TNF transgenic (Tg) mice with asymmetric knee arthritis were identified 
by contrast-enhanced (CE) magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and PLN were 
phenotyped as "expanding" or "collapsed" using LNcap threshold = 30 (Arbitrary 
Unit (AU)). Inflammatory-erosive arthritis was confirmed by histology. Afferent 
lymphatic flow to PLN and ILN was quantified by near infrared imaging of 
injected indocyanine green (NIR-ICG). The B-in population in PLN and ILN was 
assessed by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and flow cytometry. Linear regression 
analyses of ipsilateral knee synovial volume and afferent lymphatic flow to PLN 
and ILN were performed.
RESULTS: Afferent lymph flow to collapsed nodes was significantly lower (P < 
0.05) than flow to expanding nodes by NIR-ICG imaging, and this occurred 
ipsilaterally. While both collapsed and expanding PLN and ILN had a significant 
increase (P < 0.05) of B-in compared to wild type (WT) and pre-arthritic TNF-Tg 
nodes, B-in of expanding lymph nodes (LN) resided in follicular areas while B-in 
of collapsed LN were present within LYVE-1+ lymphatic vessels. A significant 
correlation (P < 0.002) was noted in afferent lymphatic flow between ipsilateral 
PLN and ILN during knee synovitis.
CONCLUSIONS: Asymmetric knee arthritis in TNF-Tg mice occurs simultaneously with 
ipsilateral PLN and ILN collapse. This is likely due to translocation of the 
expanded B-in population to the lumen of the lymphatic vessels, resulting in a 
dramatic decrease in afferent lymphatic flow. PLN collapse phenotype can serve 
as a new biomarker of knee flare.
