BACKGROUND: In 2009, xenotropic murine leukemia virus-related virus (XMRV) was 
reported in 67% of patients with chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) compared to 4% 
of controls. Since then numerous reports failed to detect XMRV in other cohorts 
of CFS patients, and some studies suggested that XMRV sequences in human samples 
might be due to contamination of these samples with mouse DNA.
RESULTS: We determined the prevalence of XMRV in patients with CFS from similar 
areas in the United States as the original 2009 study, along with patients with 
chronic inflammatory disorders and healthy persons. Using quantitative PCR, we 
initially detected very low level signals for XMRV DNA in 15% of patients with 
CFS; however, the frequency of PCR positivity was no different between patients 
with CFS and controls. Repeated attempts to isolate PCR products from these 
reactions were unsuccessful. These findings were supported by our observations 
that PHA and IL-2 stimulation of peripheral blood mononuclear cells from 
patients with apparently low levels of XMRV, which induced virus replication in 
the 2009 report, resulted in the disappearance of the signal for XMRV DNA in the 
cells. Immunoprecipitation of XMRV-infected cell lysates using serum from 
patients from whom we initially detected low levels of XMRV DNA followed by 
immunoblotting with antibodies to XMRV gp70 protein failed to detect antibody in 
the patients, although one control had a weak level of reactivity. Diverse 
murine leukemia virus (MLV) sequences were obtained by nested PCR with a similar 
frequency in CFS patients and controls. Finally, we did not detect XMRV 
sequences in patients with several chronic inflammatory disorders including 
rheumatoid arthritis, Bechet's disease, and systemic lupus erythematosus.
CONCLUSIONS: We found no definitive evidence for XMRV DNA sequences or antibody 
in our cohort of CFS patients, which like the original 2009 study, included 
patients from diverse regions of the United States. In addition, XMRV was not 
detected in a cohort of patients with chronic inflammatory disorders.
