OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the antiinflammatory effects of RC-3095 in 2 experimental 
models of arthritis, collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) and antigen-induced 
arthritis (AIA), and to determine the mechanisms of action involved.
METHODS: RC-3095 was administered daily to mice with CIA and mice with AIA, 
after induction of disease with methylated bovine serum albumin. Disease 
incidence and severity were assessed using a clinical index and evaluation of 
histologic features, respectively. In mice with CIA, gastrin-releasing peptide 
receptor (GRPR) was detected by immunohistochemical analysis, while in mice with 
AIA, migration of neutrophils, presence of glycosaminoglycans, and lymphocyte 
proliferation, determined using the MTT assay, were assessed. Expression of 
cytokines interleukin-17 (IL-17), IL-1β, and tumor necrosis factor α (TNFα) was 
evaluated in all mouse knees using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Treg cell 
production was assessed by flow cytometry in the joints of mice with AIA.
RESULTS: In mice with AIA, administration of RC-3095 reduced neutrophil 
migration, mechanical hypernociception, and proteoglycan loss. These findings 
were associated with inhibition of the levels of all 3 proinflammatory 
cytokines, decreased lymphocyte proliferation, and increased Treg cell numbers. 
In the CIA model, treatment with RC-3095 led to a significant reduction in 
arthritis clinical scores and the severity of disease determined histologically. 
Synovial inflammation, synovial hyperplasia, pannus formation, and extensive 
erosive changes were all dramatically reduced in the arthritic mice treated with 
RC-3095. Furthermore, arthritic mice treated with RC-3095 showed a significant 
reduction in the concentrations of IL-17, IL-1β, and TNFα, and showed a 
diminished expression of GRPR.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that the GRP pathway has a significant role 
in chronic arthritis, and its inhibition can be explored as a possible 
therapeutic strategy in rheumatoid arthritis.
