ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: The hip of Rosa multiflora Thunb. has been 
traditionally used as a dietary supplement and a herbal remedy for the treatment 
of various diseases including cold, flu, inflammation, osteoarthritis, 
rheumatoid arthritis and chronic pain in China.
AIMS OF THE STUDY: To explore the anti-inflammatory ingredient of the hip of R. 
multiflora Thunb. and its mechanism of action.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The ethanol extract of the hip of R. multiflora Thunb. 
was fractioned with petroleum ether, ethyl acetate and water, and each fraction 
was screened for anti-inflammatory activity in xylene-induced mouse ear edema 
model. Three more models, acetic acid-induced mouse vascular permeation, cotton 
pellet-induced rat granuloma, and carrageenan-induced rat hind paw edema were 
also employed to verify the anti-inflammatory effect of the identified fraction. 
To explore the mechanism of action, the activity of inducible nitric oxide 
synthase (iNOS) and the level of nitric oxide (NO) in sera, as well as mRNA 
expression level of cyclo-oxygenase-2 (COX-2) in inflammatory tissues of rats 
with carrageenan-induced hind paw edema were measured. GC-MS technology was 
applied to identify the active components in the active fraction.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: The petroleum ether fraction (PEF) was identified to be 
the active fraction in inflammation animal models (i.e., oral administration of 
PEF (168.48, 42.12 and 10.53 mg/kg) evoked a significantly (P<0.001) 
dose-dependent inhibition of the xylene-induced mice ear edema). Down-regulating 
COX-2 expression (P<0.001) and reducing NO production (P<0.05) through 
inhibiting iNOS activity (P<0.001) may be the partial mechanism of action of 
PEF. GC-MS analysis indicated that unsaturated fatty acids are enriched in PEF 
and may be responsible for the anti-inflammatory activity of PEF and this herb. 
The results of this study provide pharmacological and chemical basis for the 
application of the hip of R. multiflora Thunb. in inflammatory disorders.
