BACKGROUND: Glucocorticoids are the mainstream drugs used in the treatment and 
control of inflammatory diseases such as asthma. Annexin-1 (ANXA1) is an 
anti-inflammatory protein which has been described as an endogenous protein 
responsible for some anti-inflammatory glucocorticoid effects. Previous studies 
have identified its importance in other immune diseases such as rheumatoid 
arthritis and cystic fibrosis. ANXA1-deficient ((-/-)) mice are Th2 biased, and 
ANXA1 N-terminus peptide exhibits anti-inflammatory activity in a rat model of 
pulmonary inflammation.
OBJECTIVE: ANXA1 protein is found in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid from 
asthmatics. However, the function of ANXA1 in the pathological development of 
allergy or asthma is unclear. Thus, in this study we intended to examine the 
effect of ANXA1 deficiency on allergen-specific antibody responses and airway 
responses to methacholine (Mch).
METHODS: ANXA1(-/-) mice were sensitized with ovalbumin (OVA) and challenged 
with aerosolized OVA. Airway resistance, lung compliance and enhanced pause 
(PenH) were measured in naïve, sensitized and saline or allergen-challenged 
wild-type (WT) and ANXA1(-/-) mice. Total and allergen-specific antibodies were 
measured in the serum.
RESULTS: We show that allergen-specific and total IgE, IgG2a and IgG2b levels 
were significantly higher in ANXA1(-/-) mice. Furthermore, naïve ANXA1(-/-) mice 
displayed higher airway hypersensitivity to inhaled Mch, and significant 
differences were also observed in allergen-sensitized and allergen-challenged 
ANXA1(-/-) mice compared with WT mice.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, ANXA1(-/-) mice possess multiple features 
characteristic to allergic asthma, such as airway hyperresponsiveness and 
enhanced antibody responses, suggesting that ANXA1 plays a critical regulatory 
role in the development of asthma.
CLINICAL RELEVANCE: We postulate that ANXA1 is an important regulatory factor in 
the development of allergic disease and dysregulation of its expression can lead 
to pathological changes which may affect disease progression.
