BACKGROUND: The purpose of this study was to formulate and evaluate nano lipid 
vesicles of methotrexate (MTX) for its anti-rheumatoid activity.
METHODS: In this study the principle of both active as well as passive targeting 
using MTX-loaded stealth liposomes as per the magic gun approach was followed. 
Stealth liposomes of MTX were prepared by thin-film hydration method using a 
PEGylated phospholipid-like DSPE-MPEG 2000. Similarly, conventional liposomes 
were prepared using phospholipids like DPPC and DSPC. Conventional liposomes 
were coated with a hydrophilic biocompatible polymer like chitosan. They were 
investigated for their physical properties and in vitro release profile. 
Further, in vivo screening of the formulations for their anti-rheumatoid 
efficacy was carried out in rats. Rheumatoid arthritis was induced in male 
Wistar-Lewis rats using complete Freund's adjuvant (1 mg/mL Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis, heat killed in mineral oil).
RESULTS: It was found that chitosan coating of the conventional liposomes 
increased the physical stability of the liposomal suspension as well as its 
entrapment efficiency. The size of the unsonicated lipid vesicles was found to 
be in the range of 8-10 μm, and the sonicated lipid vesicles in the range of 
210-260 nm, with good polydispersity index. Further, chitosan-coated 
conventional liposomes and the PEGylated liposomes released the drug for a 
prolonged period of time, compared to the uncoated conventional liposomes. It 
was found that there was a significant reduction in edema volume in the rat 
group administered with the test stealth liposomal formulations and 
chitosan-coated conventional liposomes (PEGylated and chitosan-coated 
conventional) compared to that of the control and standard (administered with 
free MTX) group of rats. PEGylated liposomes showed almost equal efficacy as 
that of the chitosan-coated conventional liposomes.
CONCLUSION: Lipid nano vesicles of MTX can be administered by intravenous route, 
whereby the drug selectively reaches the target site with reduced toxicity to 
other organs.
