CONTEXT: Proinflammatory cytokines activate the hypothalamic pituitary adrenal 
axis in the acute phase but not with chronic inflammation; indeed, the 
hypothalamic pituitary adrenal axis is subtly subnormal, with apparently low 
ACTH and cortisol secretion. This paper reviews evidence that suggests that this 
is not simply an adaptation to chronic stress. These patients have increased 
conversion of inactive cortisone (E) to cortisol (F) by 11β-hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase type 1 (11β-HSD1). Expression of this enzyme is markedly enhanced 
by TNF, an important autocrine protective mechanism at the inflammatory site.
EVIDENCE ACQUISITION AND SYNTHESIS: This report reviews the current 
understanding of the interaction between TNF and 11β-HSD1 in patients with 
chronic inflammatory disease. It is based on publications from PubMed and the 
Science Citation Index.
CONCLUSIONS: The systemic effects of enhancing 11β-HSD1 activity may amplify the 
inflammatory response. Thus, increased conversion of cortisone to cortisol can 
alter the circadian rhythm of cortisol secretion (lower nadir, later rise, 
impaired stress response) with consequent relative nocturnal cortisol deficiency 
when inflammatory cytokines are highest. This could contribute to the circadian 
symptomatology in rheumatoid arthritis, the effectiveness of early morning (0200 
h) low-dose corticosteroids, the significant correlation between total body 
11β-HSD1 activity and erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and the effectiveness of 
11β-HSD inhibition in both the prevention and treatment of adjuvant arthritis in 
rat models of rheumatoid arthritis. It could also explain why anti-TNF therapy 
benefit can be predicted on the basis of the pretreatment plasma cortisol and 
the subsequent cortisol rise. In contrast, this mechanism is likely to be 
beneficial in the body's response to chronic infections such as tuberculosis and 
could explain why anti-TNF treatment markedly increases the risk of reactivation 
of the disease.
