INTRODUCTION: The aim of this study was to investigate the association between 
exposure to cosmetics, often containing mineral oil, and the risk of developing 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA). The study was performed against the background that 
occupational exposure to mineral oil has recently been shown to be associated 
with an increased risk for RA in man, and that injection of or percutaneous 
exposure to mineral-oil-containing cosmetics can induce arthritis in certain rat 
strains.
METHODS: A population-based case-control study of incident cases of RA was 
performed among the population aged 18 to 70 years in a defined area of Sweden 
during May 1996 to December 2003. A case was defined as an individual from the 
study base, who received for the first time a diagnosis of RA according to the 
1987 American College of Rheumatology criteria. Controls were randomly selected 
from the study base with consideration taken for age, gender and residential 
area. Cases (n = 1,419) and controls (n = 1,674) answered an extensive 
questionnaire regarding environmental and lifestyle factors including habits of 
cosmetic usage. The relative risk of developing RA was calculated for subjects 
with different cosmetic usage compared with subjects with low or no usage. 
Analysis was also performed stratifying the cases for presence/absence of 
rheumatoid factor and antibodies to citrulline-containing peptides.
RESULTS: The relative risks of developing RA associated with use of cosmetics 
were all close to one, both for women and men, for different exposure 
categories, and in relation to different subgroups of RA.
CONCLUSION: This study does not support the hypothesis that ordinary usage of 
common cosmetics as body lotions, skin creams, and ointments, often containing 
mineral oil, increase the risk for RA in the population in general. We cannot 
exclude, however, that these cosmetics can contribute to arthritis in 
individuals carrying certain genotypes or simultaneously being exposed to other 
arthritis-inducing environmental agents.
