The development and maintenance of immunosuppressive CD4+ regulatory T cells 
(Tregs) contribute to the peripheral tolerance needed to remain in immunologic 
homeostasis with the vast amount of self and commensal antigens in and on the 
human body. Perturbations in the balance between Tregs and inflammatory 
conventional T cells can result in immunopathology or cancer. Although 
therapeutic injection of Tregs has been shown to be efficacious in murine models 
of colitis, type I diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis and graft versus host disease, 
several fundamental differences in human versus mouse Treg biology has thus far 
precluded clinical use. The lack of sufficient number, purity, stability and 
homing specificity of therapeutic Tregs necessitated a dynamic platform of human 
Treg development on which to optimize conditions for their ex vivo expansion. 
Here we describe a method for the differentiation of induced Tregs (iTregs) from 
a single human peripheral blood donor which can be broken down into four stages: 
isolation of peripheral blood mononuclear cells, magnetic selection of CD4+ T 
cells, in vitro cell culture and fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS) of T 
cell subsets. Since the Treg signature transcription factor forkhead box P3 
(FoxP3) is an activation-induced transcription factor in humans and no other 
unique marker exists, a combinatorial panel of markers must be used to identify 
T cells with suppressor activity. After six days in culture, cells in our system 
can be demarcated into naïve T cells, memory T cells or iTregs based on their 
relative expression of CD25 and CD45RA. As memory and naïve T cells have 
different reported polarization requirements and plasticities, pre-sorting of 
the initial T cell population into CD45RA(+) and CD45RO(+) subsets can be used 
to examine these discrepancies. Consistent with others, our CD25(Hi)CD45RA(-) 
iTregs express high levels of FoxP3, GITR and CTLA-4 and low levels of CD127. 
Following FACS of each population, resultant cells can be used in a suppressor 
assay which evaluates the relative ability to retard the proliferation of 
carboxyfluorescein succinimidyl ester (CFSE)-labeled autologous T cells.
