BACKGROUND: Non-invasive imaging of inflammation to measure the progression of 
autoimmune diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis (RA), and to monitor responses 
to therapy is critically needed. V-Sense, a perfluorocarbon (PFC) contrast agent 
that preferentially labels inflammatory cells, which are then recruited out of 
systemic circulation to sites of inflammation, enables detection by 19F MRI. 
With no 19F background in the host, detection is highly-specific and can act as 
a proxy biomarker of the degree of inflammation present.
METHODS: Collagen-induced arthritis in rats, a model with many similarities to 
human RA, was used to study the ability of the PFC contrast agent to reveal the 
accumulation of inflammation over time using 19F MRI. Disease progression in the 
rat hind limbs was monitored by caliper measurements and 19F MRI on days 15, 22 
and 29, including the height of clinically symptomatic disease. Naïve rats 
served as controls. The capacity of the PFC contrast agent and 19F MRI to assess 
the effectiveness of therapy was studied in a cohort of rats administered oral 
prednisolone on days 14 to 28.
RESULTS: Quantification of 19F signal measured by MRI in affected limbs was 
linearly correlated with disease severity. In animals with progressive disease, 
increases in 19F signal reflected the ongoing recruitment of inflammatory cells 
to the site, while no increase in 19F signal was observed in animals receiving 
treatment which resulted in clinical resolution of disease.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that 19F MRI may be used to quantitatively 
and qualitatively evaluate longitudinal responses to a therapeutic regimen, 
while additionally revealing the recruitment of monocytic cells involved in the 
inflammatory process to the anatomical site. This study may support the use of 
19F MRI to clinically quantify and monitor the severity of inflammation, and to 
assess the effectiveness of treatments in RA and other diseases with an 
inflammatory component.
