INTRODUCTION: Dysregulated angiogenesis is implicated in the pathogenesis of 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA). To provide a more profound understanding of 
arthritis-associated angiogenesis, we evaluated the expression of 
angiogenesis-modulating genes at onset, peak and declining phases of 
collagen-induced arthritis (CIA), a well-established mouse model for RA.
METHODS: CIA was induced in DBA/1 mice with type II collagen. Functional 
capillary density in synovial tissue of knee joints was determined by intravital 
fluorescence microscopy. To assess the ability of arthritic joint homogenates to 
induce angiogenesis, an endothelial chemotaxis assay and an in vivo matrigel 
plug assay were employed. The temporal expression profile of 
angiogenesis-related genes in arthritic paws was analysed by quantitative 
real-time RT-PCR using an angiogenesis focused array as well as gene specific 
PCR. Finally, we investigated the therapeutic effect of a monoclonal antibody 
specifically blocking the binding of VEGF to neuropilin (NRP)-1.
RESULTS: Although arthritic paw homogenates displayed angiogenic activity in 
vitro and in vivo, and synovia of arthritic paws appeared highly vascularised on 
histological examination, the functional capillary density in arthritic knee 
synovia was significantly decreased, whereas capillary diameter was increased. 
Of the 84 genes analysed, 41 displayed a differential expression in arthritic 
paws as compared to control paws. Most significant alterations were seen at the 
peak of clinical arthritis. Increased mRNA expression could be observed for VEGF 
receptors (Flt-1, Flk-1, Nrp-1, Nrp-2), as well as for midkine, hepatocyte 
growth factor, insulin-like growth factor-1 and angiopoietin-1. Signalling 
through NRP-1 accounted in part for the chemotactic activity for endothelial 
cells observed in arthritic paw homogenates. Importantly, therapeutic 
administration of anti-NRP1B antibody significantly reduced disease severity and 
progression in CIA mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings confirm that the arthritic synovium in murine CIA is a 
site of active angiogenesis, but an altered balance in the expression of 
angiogenic factors seems to favour the formation of non-functional and dilated 
capillaries. Furthermore, our results validate NRP-1 as a key player in the 
pathogenesis of CIA, and support the VEGF/VEGF receptor pathway as a potential 
therapeutic target in RA.
