Th17 cells produce IL-17, and the latter promotes bone loss in collagen-induced 
arthritis in mice. Blocking IL-17 action in mouse model of rheumatoid arthritis 
reduces disease symptoms. These observations suggest that Th17 cells may be 
involved in the pathogenesis of bone loss. However, the role of Th17 cell in 
estrogen (E2) deficiency-induced bone loss is still not very clear. We 
investigated the effect of E2 on Th17 differentiation in vivo and IL-17 mediated 
regulation of osteoclast and osteoblast differentiation. Additionally, effect of 
IL-17 functional block under E2 deficiency-induced bone loss was studied. In 
murine bone marrow cells, E2 suppressed IL-17 mediated osteoclast 
differentiation. IL-17 inhibited formation of mineralized nodules in osteoblasts 
and this effect was suppressed by E2. E2 treatment to mouse calvarial 
osteoblasts inhibited the IL-17-induced production of osteoclastogenic cytokines 
and NF-kB translocation. In ovariectomized mice, there was increase in the 
number of Th17 cells, transcription factors promoting Th17 cell differentiation 
and circulating IL-17 levels. These effects were reversed by E2 supplementation. 
Treatment of neutralizing IL-17 monoclonal antibody to Ovx mice mitigated the E2 
deficiency-induced trabecular bone loss and reversed the decreased 
osteoprotegerin-to-receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa B ligand (RANKL) 
transcript levels in long bones, increased osteoclast differentiation from the 
bone marrow precursor cells and decreased osteoblast differentiation from the 
bone marrow stromal cells. Our findings indicate that E2 deficiency leads to 
increased differentiation of Th17 cells with attendant up regulation of STAT3, 
ROR-γt and ROR-α and downregulation of Foxp3 which antagonizes Th17 cell 
differentiation. Increased IL-17 production in turn induces bone loss by 
increasing pro-osteoclastogenic cytokines including TNF-α, IL-6 and RANKL from 
osteoblasts and functional block of IL-17 prevents bone loss. IL-17 thus plays a 
critical causal role in Ovx-induced bone loss and may be considered a potential 
therapeutic target in pathogenesis of post menopausal osteoporosis.
