BACKGROUND: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA), a chronic autoimmune disease, affects 
sufferers in many different ways. Treatment of this chronic condition is 
particularly challenging. Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM) provides 
alternatives. Bizhongxiao decoction (BZX) is a TCM complex, which has been used 
clinically for many years to treat RA. The purpose of this study is to compare 
the effects of BZX decoction and its dismantled formulae on IL-1 and TNF-1 
levels in rats with RA, and to elucidate its mechanism of action.
METHODS: Ninety healthy normal female SD rats were randomly divided into six 
groups: normal (control), model, BZX decoction, and the three dismantled 
formulae (I: heat-clearing and detoxication, II: dissipating dampness, and III: 
blood circulation promotion). Apart from the normal (control) group, the rats in 
each group were injected subcutaneously with bovine type II collagen and 
complete Freund adjuvant to establish a collagen-induced arthritis model, so 
that inhibition of foot swelling in the rats by BZX decoction and its dismantled 
formulae could be observed. Immunohistochemistry was used to assess the levels 
of the inflammatory cytokines IL-1 and TNF in synovial joints at various time 
points.
RESULTS: Twenty-one days after the model was established, the levels of TNF and 
IL-1 were significantly higher in the model group, BZX decoction group and 
dismantled formula groups I, II and III than in the normal controls (P < 0.05). 
The levels of these cytokines were significantly higher in the model group than 
the BZX decoction or the three dismantled formula groups (P <0.01). At longer 
times, the TNF and IL-1 levels in model group rose gradually; those in the BZX 
decoction and dismantled formula groups were gradually reduced. The cytokine 
levels in the BZX decoction group were lower than in the three dismantled 
formula groups and continued to decline.
CONCLUSIONS: BZX decoction and the three dismantled formulae examined 
down-regulated the inflammatory factors IL-1 and TNF in collagen-induced 
arthritis rat models, but BZX exerted the strongest effect.
