BACKGROUND: Cia5a is a locus on rat chromosome 10 that regulates disease 
severity and joint damage in two models of rheumatoid arthritis, collagen- and 
pristane-induced arthritis (PIA). In this study, we aimed to identify cellular 
and molecular processes regulated by Cia5a using microarray-based gene 
expression analysis of synovial tissues from MHC identical DA (severe erosive 
disease) and DA.F344(Cia5a) congenics (mild non-erosive disease) rats.
RESULTS: Synovial tissues from six DA and eight DA.F344(Cia5a) rats were 
analyzed 21 days after the induction of PIA using the Illumina RatRef-12 
BeadChip (21,922 genes) and selected data confirmed with qPCR. There was a 
significantly increased expression of pro-inflammatory mediators such as Il1b 
(5-fold), Il18 (3.9-fold), Cxcl1 (10-fold), Cxcl13 (7.5-fold) and Ccl7 
(7.9-fold), and proteases like Mmp3 (23-fold), Mmp9 (32-fold), Mmp14 (4.4-fold) 
and cathepsins in synovial tissues from DA, with reciprocally reduced levels in 
congenics. mRNA levels of 47 members of the Spleen Tyrosine Kinase (Syk) pathway 
were significantly increased in DA synovial tissues compared with 
DA.F344(Cia5a), and included Syk (5.4-fold), Syk-activating receptors and 
interacting proteins, and genes regulated by Syk such as NFkB, and NAPDH oxidase 
complex genes. Nuclear receptors (NR) such as Rxrg, Pparg and Rev-erba were 
increased in the protected congenics, and so was the anti-inflammatory NR-target 
gene Scd1 (54-fold increase). Tnn (72-fold decrease) was the gene most 
significantly increased in DA.
CONCLUSIONS: Analyses of gene expression in synovial tissues revealed that the 
arthritis severity locus Cia5a regulates the expression of key mediators of 
inflammation and joint damage, as well as the expression of members of the Syk 
pathway. This expression pattern correlates with disease severity and joint 
damage and along with the gene accounting for Cia5a could become a useful 
biomarker to identify patients at increased risk for severe and erosive disease. 
The identification of the gene accounting for Cia5a has the potential to 
generate a new and important target for therapy and prognosis.
