OBJECTIVE: To investigate the role of the antiinflammatory neuropeptide 
cortistatin in chronic pain evoked by joint inflammation.
METHODS: Thermal and mechanical hyperalgesia was evoked in mouse knee joints by 
intraplantar injection of tumor necrosis factor α and intraarticular infusion of 
Freund's complete adjuvant, and the analgesic effects of cortistatin, 
administered centrally, peripherally, and systemically, were assessed. In 
addition, the effects of cortistatin on the production of nociceptive peptides 
and the activation of pain signaling were assayed in dorsal root ganglion 
cultures and in inflammatory pain models. The role of endogenous cortistatin in 
pain sensitization and perpetuation of chronic inflammatory states was evaluated 
in cortistatin-deficient mice. Finally, the effect of noxious/inflammatory 
stimuli in the production of cortistatin by the peripheral nociceptive system 
was assayed in vitro and in vivo.
RESULTS: Expression of cortistatin was observed in peptidergic nociceptors of 
the peripheral nociceptive system, and endogenous cortistatin was found to 
participate in the tuning of pain sensitization, especially in pathologic 
inflammatory conditions. Results showed that cortistatin acted both peripherally 
and centrally to reduce the tactile allodynia and heat hyperalgesia evoked by 
arthritis and peripheral tissue inflammation in mice, via mechanisms that were 
independent of its antiinflammatory action. These mechanisms involved direct 
action on nociceptive neurons and regulation of central sensitization. The 
analgesic effects of cortistatin in murine arthritic pain were linked to binding 
of the neuropeptide to somatostatin and ghrelin receptors, activation of the G 
protein subunit Gαi , impairment of ERK signaling, and decreased production of 
calcitonin gene-related peptide in primary nociceptors.
CONCLUSION: These findings indicate that cortistatin is an antiinflammatory 
factor with potent analgesic effects that may offer a new approach to pain 
therapy in pathologic inflammatory states, including osteoarthritis and 
rheumatoid arthritis.
