Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic autoimmune disease occurring in 
approximately 1% of the worldwide population. The disease primarily affects the 
joints, where inflammatory cells, such as macrophages, invade the synovium and 
cause cartilage and bone destruction. Currently, it is difficult to efficiently 
diagnose and monitor early-stage RA. In this study, we investigated whether 
SPECT/micro-CT imaging with (99m)Tc-labeled Nanobodies directed against the 
macrophage mannose receptor (MMR) is a useful tool for monitoring and 
quantifying joint inflammation in collagen-induced arthritis (CIA), a mouse 
model for RA. The expression of MMR was analyzed on macrophages and osteoclasts 
generated in vitro and in cells obtained from various organs from mice with CIA.
METHODS: CIA was induced in DBA/1 mice by injection of collagen type II in 
complete Freund adjuvant, and cell suspensions from the inflamed joints and 
other organs were obtained. Macrophages and osteoclasts were generated in vitro 
from bone marrow cells. Expression of MMR was quantified by quantitative 
polymerase chain reaction and flow cytometry with specific Nanobodies and 
conventional antibodies. SPECT/micro-CT imaging was performed with 
(99m)Tc-labeled MMR and control Nanobodies.
RESULTS: MMR was highly expressed on macrophages and to a lesser extent on 
osteoclasts generated in vitro. In mice with CIA, MMR expression was detected on 
cells from the bone marrow, lymph nodes, and spleen. In synovial fluid of 
arthritic joints, MMR was expressed on CD11b(+)F4/80(+) macrophages. On in vivo 
SPECT/micro-CT imaging with consecutive injections of MMR and control 
Nanobodies, a strong MMR signal was seen in the knees, ankles, and toes of 
arthritic mice. Quantification of the SPECT imaging confirmed the specificity of 
the MMR signal in inflamed joints as compared with the control Nanobody. 
Dissection of the paws revealed an additional significant MMR signal in 
nonarthritic paws of affected mice (i.e., mice displaying symptoms of arthritis 
in other paws).
CONCLUSION: Our data show that MMR is expressed on macrophages in vitro and in 
vivo in synovial fluid of inflamed paws, whereas expression is relatively low in 
other tissues. The use of Nanobodies against MMR in SPECT/micro-CT imaging 
generates the possibility to track inflammatory cells in vivo in arthritic 
joints.
