BACKGROUND: Significant restriction in the ability to participate in home, work 
and community life results from pain, fatigue, joint damage, stiffness and 
reduced joint range of motion and muscle strength in people with rheumatoid 
arthritis or osteoarthritis of the hand. With modest evidence on the therapeutic 
effectiveness of conventional hand exercises, a task-oriented training program 
via real life object manipulations has been developed for people with arthritis. 
An innovative, computer-based gaming platform that allows a broad range of 
common objects to be seamlessly transformed into therapeutic input devices 
through instrumentation with a motion-sense mouse has also been designed. 
Personalized objects are selected to target specific training goals such as 
graded finger mobility, strength, endurance or fine/gross dexterous functions. 
The movements and object manipulation tasks that replicate common situations in 
everyday living will then be used to control and play any computer game, making 
practice challenging and engaging.
METHODS/DESIGN: The ongoing study is a 6-week, single-center, parallel-group, 
equally allocated and assessor-blinded pilot randomized controlled trial. Thirty 
people with rheumatoid arthritis or osteoarthritis affecting the hand will be 
randomized to receive either conventional hand exercises or the task-oriented 
training. The purpose is to determine a preliminary estimation of therapeutic 
effectiveness and feasibility of the task-oriented training program. Performance 
based and self-reported hand function, and exercise compliance are the study 
outcomes. Changes in outcomes (pre to post intervention) within each group will 
be assessed by paired Student t test or Wilcoxon signed-rank test and between 
groups (control versus experimental) post intervention using unpaired Student t 
test or Mann-Whitney U test.
DISCUSSION: The study findings will inform decisions on the feasibility, safety 
and completion rate and will also provide preliminary data on the treatment 
effects of the task-oriented training compared with conventional hand exercises 
in people with rheumatoid arthritis or osteoarthritis of the hand.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT01635582.
