The availability of a large variety of specific blockers, which inhibit 
different K(+) currents, would help to elucidate their differences in 
physiological function. Short peptide toxins isolated from scorpion venoms are 
able to block voltage-dependent or Ca(2+)-activated K(+) channels. Here, we have 
studied the venom of the Moroccan scorpion Buthus occitanus Paris (BoP) in order 
to find new peptides, which could enlarge our structure-function relationship 
knowledge on the Kv1.3 blocker Kaliotoxin (KTX) that belongs to the α-KTx3.1 
family. Indeed and since more a decade, KTX is widely used by international 
investigators because it exhibits a quite sharp specificity and a high-affinity 
for the Kv1.3 channel, which is not only a neuronal channel but also a 
therapeutic target for diverse autoimmune diseases such as multiple sclerosis, 
type 1 diabetes, and rheumatoid arthritis. The BoP venom was first investigated 
using HPLC and MALDI-TOF/MS. Further, the HPLC fractions were screened by ELISA 
with antibodies raised against KTX. These antibodies recognized at least three 
components toxic in mice by intracerebroventricular injection. They were further 
pharmacologically characterized by competition using (125)I-KTX bound to its 
specific binding sites on rat brain synaptosomes. A single component (4161 Da) 
inhibited totally the (125)I-KTX binding and with high-affinity (IC50 = 0.1 nM), 
while the two other components poorly competed with (IC50 > 100 nM). These 
toxins were sequenced in full by Edman's degradation. The high-affinity ligand 
(BoPKTX) shares 86% sequence identity with KTX and was classified as toxin 
α-KTx3.17. The two others peptides (BoP1 and BoP2, 4093 Da and 4121 Da, 
respectively) only differ by a Lys/Arg mutation. Their amino acid sequences were 
related to Martentoxin, which has been characterized from the Chinese scorpion 
Buthus martenzi Karch and described as both a BKCa and Kv1.3 blocker. 
Accordingly, they belong to the α-KTx16 family.
