Norisoboldine (NOR) is the main alkaloid constituent in the dry root of Lindera 
aggregata (Sims) Kosterm. (L. strychnifolia Vill.). As reported previously, 
orally administered NOR displayed a robust inhibition of joint bone destruction 
present in both mouse collagen-induced arthritis and rat adjuvant-induced 
arthritis with lower efficacious doses than that required for ameliorating 
systemic inflammation. This attracted us to assess the effects of NOR on 
differentiation and function of osteoclasts, primary effector cells for 
inflammatory bone destruction, to get insight into its anti-rheumatoid arthritis 
mechanisms. Both RAW264.7 cells and mouse bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMMs) 
were stimulated with RANKL (100 ng/mL) to establish osteoclast differentiation 
models. ELISA, RT-PCR, gelatin zymography, western blotting, immunoprecipitation 
and EMSA were used to reveal related signalling pathways. NOR (10 and 30 µM), 
without significant cytotoxicity, showed significant reduction of the number of 
osteoclasts and the resorption pit areas, and it targeted osteoclast 
differentiation at the early stage. In conjunction with the anti-resorption 
effect of NOR, mRNA levels of cathepsin K and MMP-9 were decreased, and the 
activity of MMP-9 was attenuated. Furthermore, our mechanistic studies indicated 
that NOR obviously suppressed the ubiquitination of TRAF6, the accumulation of 
TRAF6-TAK1 complexes and the activation of ERK and p38 MAPK, and reduced the 
nuclear translocation of NF-κB-p65 and DNA-binding activity of NF-κB. However, 
NOR had little effect on expressions of TRAF6 or the phosphorylation and 
degradation of IκBα. Moreover, NOR markedly inhibited expressions of 
transcription factor NFATc1, but not c-Fos. Intriguingly, the subsequent nuclear 
translocations of c-Fos and NFATc1 were substantially down-regulated. Hence, we 
demonstrated for the first time that preventing the differentiation and function 
of osteoclasts at the early stage was an important anti-bone destruction 
mechanism of NOR, which might be attributed to inhibition of ubiquitination of 
TRAF6, the accumulation of TRAF6-TAK1 complexes and the activation of 
MAPKs/NF-κB/c-Fos/NFATc1 pathways.
