Patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) often bear joint destruction and 
symptomatic pain. The aim of this work is to develop a compound transdermal 
patch containing teriflunomide (TEF) and lornoxicam (LOX) to transport these 
drugs across the skin with the isochronous permeation rates for RA therapy and 
investigate intra-articular delivery of TEF and LOX following transdermal 
patches applied topically. The salts of TEF and LOX with organic amines 
diethylamine (DEtA), triethylamine (TEtA), diethanolamine (DEA), triethanolamine 
(TEA) and N-(2'-hydroxy-ethanol)-piperdine (NP) were prepared to improve the 
skin permeation of the parent drug. The optimized patch formulation is obtained 
from a 3-factor, 2-level central composite design. After topical application of 
the optimized compound patch to only one knee joint in rabbit, intra-articular 
delivery of TEF and LOX on the application site was compared with that on the 
non-application site. Anti-inflammatory and analgesic effects of the optimized 
compound patch were evaluated using the adjuvant arthritis model and the pain 
model induced by acetic acid, respectively. The in vitro experiment results 
showed that the amine salts of TEF and LOX, especially TEF-TEtA and LOX-TEtA, 
enhanced the skin permeation of TEF and LOX from the transdermal patch system. 
The optimal formulation successfully displayed isochronous permeation rates for 
TEF and LOX across rabbit skin, and was defined with 5% of TEF-TEtA, 10% of 
LOX-TEtA and 15% of azone. The in vivo study showed that TEF and LOX from 
transdermal patches were transferred into skin, ligament and fat pad on the 
application site by direct diffusion and on the non-application site by the 
redistribution of systemic blood supply, while local absorption of TEF and LOX 
in synovial fluid originated from the systemic blood supply rather than direct 
diffusion. In the RA rat model, the results of swelling inhibition on primary 
arthritis of bilateral hind paws further confirmed the above-mentioned point. 
The optimal formulation displayed a double response on joint inflammation and 
symptomatic pain. In conclusion, although transdermal administration applied 
topically can provide a local enhanced drug delivery for the superficial joint 
tissues by direct diffusion, it seemed unlikely to do that for the deeper tissue 
synovial fluid.
