OBJECTIVE: Arthritis is frequently seen in human lupus, but rarely in lupus 
models. Pristane-induced lupus (PIL) can be induced in various mouse strains 
such as BALB/c and C57BL/6. We herein characterize clinical and histological 
features of arthritis in the context of systemic lupus and provide a prudent 
comparison with models of rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
METHODS: A total of 57 BALB/c mice received pristane (PIL group) and were 
analyzed for serum autoantibodies (anti-chromatin-, -histone, -Sm, -dsDNA), as 
well as for clinical features and histopathology of joints, lungs and kidneys. 
Joint pathology was quantified by image analysis and tissue cytometry. Ten 
C57BL/6 mice (Bl/6-PIL) and historical groups of two different RA models were 
analyzed accordingly.
RESULTS: In BALB/c PIL, clinical arthritis started at three months, occurred 
finally in 79% of PIL (but not in controls, p<0.001) and correlated with areas 
of inflammation, erosion, cartilage damage, osteoclast numbers and total 
severity score (for all: r>0.7, p<0.001). After eight months, 58% of PIL (but no 
controls, p<0.001) had mild-erosive arthritis. In contrast to RA, the most 
frequent inflammatory cell type of the pannus was granulocytes (17.7%), PIL had 
lower numbers of osteoclasts, erosions rarely affected both layers of the 
cortical bone and there was no progression to complete joint destruction (even 
after one year of observation). Serum autoantibodies (auto-abs) preceded 
arthritis and became significantly elevated in all PIL; affected joints showed 
increased deposits of IgG (and IgM) within the inflammatory tissue, indicative 
of an ab-mediated process. PIL mice with arthritis also showed signs of 
pulmonary (100%) and renal (46%) lupus. In contrast to BALB/c, Bl/6-PIL mice did 
not develop any signs of arthritis.
CONCLUSION: PIL in BALB/c mice is characterized by severe organ involvement, 
typical autoabs and by a mild-erosive arthritis with similarities to, but also 
with distinct differences from, RA. PIL may help to study arthritis along with 
other key features of systemic lupus erythematosus after therapeutic 
interventions or in knock-out models based on a BALB/c but not on a C57BL/6 
background.
