Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and spondyloarthritis (SpA) are chronic diseases 
characterized by activation of the immune system and production of antibodies. 
Thus, rheumatoid factor, anti-animal IgG antibodies and heterophilic antibodies 
in plasma samples from arthritis patients can interfere with immunoassays such 
as sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) systems often used in 
arthritis research. However, standard methodologies on how to test for false 
results caused by these antibodies are lacking. The objective of this study was 
to design a simple set of steps to validate a sandwich ELISA before using it for 
measuring analytes in plasma from arthritis patients. An interleukin-24 (IL-24) 
sandwich ELISA system was prepared with a monoclonal mouse capture antibody and 
a polyclonal goat detection antibody and tested for interference by rheumatoid 
factor, anti-animal IgG antibodies and heterophilic antibodies. Plasma samples 
from 23 patients with RA and SpA were used. No differences were found between 
plasma samples measured in wells coated with anti-IL-24 specific antibody and in 
wells coated with isotype control antibody (false positive results), and 
recombinant human IL-24 was not recovered in spiked samples (false negative 
results). This interference was removed after preincubating the plasma samples 
from patients with arthritis with goat or bovine IgG, suggesting that 
anti-animal IgG antibodies found in the plasma of the arthritis patients caused 
the false results. Additional testing showed that the signal-to-noise ratio 
could be increased by titration of the capture and detection antibodies and by 
using the ELAST amplification system. Finally, the calculated concentration of 
IL-24 was increased in ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) plasma compared to 
heparin plasma and serum and decreased with repetitive freeze/thaw cycles of the 
samples illustrating how sample handling could additionally contribute to the 
variations reported by different laboratories in measurement of the same 
analyte. This study proposes a simple set of validation steps to evaluate and 
optimize a sandwich ELISA before using it for measuring analytes in plasma from 
arthritis patients. Anti-animal IgG antibodies are also present in healthy 
individuals, suggesting that validation of ELISA systems for measuring 
non-arthritis samples could also be improved by this simple set of validation 
steps.
