There is a significant prevalence of subjects with periodontitis presenting with 
other inflammatory conditions such as coronary heart disease, insulin resistance 
and arthritis. This pattern of disease presentation underscores the importance 
of inflammatory loading from chronic diseases, in driving their pathogeneses in 
a multidirectional manner. Pro-inflammatory cytokines and other agents play an 
important role in this process; for example, a single nucleotide polymorphism of 
the TNF-α gene is associated with significant periodontal attachment loss in 
patients with coronary heart disease. Changes in gene expression associated with 
inflammation and lipid metabolism in response to oral infection with the 
periodontal pathogen Porphyromonas gingivalis (Pg) have been demonstrated in 
mouse models, independent of the demonstration of atherosclerotic lesions. 
Insulin resistance is considered to be a chronic low-grade inflammatory 
condition, associated with altered glucose tolerance, hypertriglyceridemia, 
central obesity and coronary heart disease. It is accompanied by elevated levels 
of IL-1, IL-6 and TNF-α also relevant to the progression of periodontitis. There 
is evidence that uncontrolled periodontal disease contributes to maintenance of 
systemic diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis (RA), with increased risk of 
periodontitis in subjects with RA. The periodontal pathogen Pg is significant in 
contributing to citrullination of proteins resulting in immune dysregulation and 
autoimmune responses, seen in RA. However, they are both multifactorial chronic 
diseases with complex etiopathogeneses that affect their presentation. 
Consistent but weak associations are seen for surrogate markers of periodontitis 
such as tooth loss, with multiple systemic conditions. Effective treatment of 
periodontitis would be important in reducing systemic inflammatory loading from 
chronic local inflammation and in achieving systemic health. Lack of a 
consistent cause and effect relationship in all subjects would be influenced by 
genetic, epigenetic and other subject variables, although there are clear 
mechanisms that link the associations. This article includes an appraisal of 
patents and their applications.
