INTRODUCTION: Spleen tyrosine kinase (SYK) is a key integrator of intracellular 
signals triggered by activated immunoreceptors, including Bcell receptors (BCR) 
and Fc receptors, which are important for the development and function of 
lymphoid cells. Given the clinical efficacy of Bcell depletion in the treatment 
of rheumatoid arthritis and multiple sclerosis, pharmacological modulation of 
Bcells using orally active small molecules that selectively target SYK presents 
an attractive alternative therapeutic strategy.
METHODS: A SYK inhibitor was developed and assayed in various in vitro systems 
and in the mouse model of collagen-induced arthritis (mCIA).
RESULTS: A novel ATP-competitive inhibitor of SYK, 
6-[(1R,2S)-2-Amino-cyclohexylamino]-4-(5,6-dimethyl-pyridin-2-ylamino)-pyridazine-3-carboxylic 
acid amide, designated RO9021, with an adequate kinase selectivity profile and 
oral bioavailability, was developed. In addition to suppression of BCR signaling 
in human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) and whole blood, FcγR 
signaling in human monocytes, and FcϵR signaling in human mast cells, RO9021 
blocked osteoclastogenesis from mouse bone marrow macrophages in vitro. 
Interestingly, Toll-like Receptor (TLR) 9 signaling in human Bcells was 
inhibited by RO9021, resulting in decreased levels of plasmablasts, 
immunoglobulin (Ig) M and IgG upon B-cell differentiation. RO9021 also potently 
inhibited type I interferon production by human plasmacytoid dendritic cells 
(pDC) upon TLR9 activation. This effect is specific to TLR9 as RO9021 did not 
inhibit TLR4- or JAK-STAT-mediated signaling. Finally, oral administration of 
RO9021 inhibited arthritis progression in the mCIA model, with observable 
pharmacokinetics (PK)-pharmacodynamic (PD) correlation.
CONCLUSIONS: Inhibition of SYK kinase activity impinges on various innate and 
adaptive immune responses. RO9021 could serve as a starting point for the 
development of selective SYK inhibitors for the treatment of 
inflammation-related and autoimmune-related disorders.
