INTRODUCTION: Abnormal toll-like receptor (TLR)3 signaling plays an 
indispensable role in pathogenesis of both experimental and human rheumatoid 
arthritis, and microRNAs (miRNAs) might orchestrate this signaling pathway. This 
study was performed to determine the relationship between miR-26a and TLR3 in 
rat macrophages and to observe effects of miR-26a mimic on pristane induced 
arthritis (PIA) in rats.
METHODS: Dual luciferase reporter assay was used to validate the direct 
interaction between miR-26a (a candidate miRNA to target tlr3 mRNA) and tlr3 
3'UTR. MiR-26a regulation on TLR3 gene expression was determined using RT-qPCR 
and Western blotting after miR-26a mimics and inhibitors were transfected into 
rat macrophage line NR8383 cells. Poly I:C (TLR3 ligand) was used to trigger 
TLR3 activation, and mRNA expression of its downstream cytokines interferon 
(ifn)-β and tumor necrosis factor (tnf)-α was accordingly detected to determine 
the regulation of TLR3 signaling. Expressions of TLR3 and miR-26a were detected 
during rat bone marrow derived macrophage (BMDM) induction, in pristane 
stimulated NR8383 cells and spleens from methotrexate (MTX) treated PIA rats. A 
miR-26a mimic was administrated intraperitoneally to PIA rats, and arthritis 
severity was evaluated by macroscopic or microscopic observations.
RESULTS: Direct target relationship between miR-26a and tlr3 mRNA in rats was 
confirmed. Modifications of miR-26a function by transfection of miR-26a mimics 
and inhibitors exhibited corresponding repression and augmentation of TLR3 and 
its signaling downstream cytokine expressions in NR8383 cells. The alteration of 
miR-26a expression was negatively related with TLR3 expression during BMDM 
induction, in pristane-primed NR8383 cells and PIA rat spleens. Moreover, both 
abnormal expressions were rescued in MTX treated arthritis rat spleens. The 
miR-26a mimic treatment displayed the depression of TLR3 expression and 
ameliorated the disease severity in the rats with pristane induced arthritis.
CONCLUSIONS: MiR-26a negatively regulates TLR3 signaling via targeting of TLR3 
itself in rat macrophages, and this finding provides a novel insight into 
abnormal TLR3 overexpression during experimental arthritis.
