OBJECTIVE: To study the relationship between the human secreted protein 
stabilin-1-interacting chitinase-like protein (SI-CLP) and rheumatoid arthritis 
(RA).
METHODS: The expression of SI-CLP in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) 
and synovial fluid from patients with RA and the effects of cytokines on SI-CLP 
expression were examined by Western blotting. Fluorescence-activated cell 
sorting analysis was performed to investigate the binding between SI-CLP and 
cells. Bone marrow-derived macrophages were isolated from wild-type and 
SI-CLP(-/-) mice, and real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction was 
performed to detect the levels of messenger RNA for cytokines or SI-CLP in 
SI-CLP- or cytokine-treated macrophages. Histologic studies were conducted to 
evaluate inflammation and the expression of interleukin-12 (IL-12), IL-13, and 
SI-CLP in lesions. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays were used to detect the 
cytokine levels in bone marrow-derived macrophages. Rats or mice with 
collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) and SI-CLP(-/-) mice were used to study the 
function of SI-CLP in RA.
RESULTS: SI-CLP expression was increased in PBMCs and detectable in synovial 
fluid from patients with RA. Administration of SI-CLP to rats with CIA 
aggravated arthritis-associated inflammation. SI-CLP was specifically attached 
to the surface protein of macrophages, which elevated the expression of IL-1β, 
IL-6, IL-12, and IL-13 in macrophages and mouse bone marrow-derived macrophages, 
up-regulating ERK phosphorylation. Moreover, SI-CLP was up-regulated by both 
IL-12 and IL-13 through JNK and JAK/STAT signaling, respectively. Knockout of 
SI-CLP resulted in a decrease in the expression of IL-1β, IL-6, IL-12, and IL-13 
and lower susceptibility to CIA compared with wild-type mice. SI-CLP treatment 
also aggravated arthritis-related inflammation in wild-type and SI-CLP(-/-) 
mice.
CONCLUSION: SI-CLP functions as a regulator of the inflammatory response by 
macrophages. The decrease in inflammation-associated cytokine levels resulting 
from SI-CLP knockout may explain the lower susceptibility to CIA in SI-CLP(-/-) 
mice.
