OBJECTIVE: The parasitic worm-derived immunomodulator ES-62 protects against 
disease in the mouse collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) model of rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA) by suppressing pathogenic interleukin-17 (IL-17) responses. The 
Th17-associated cytokine IL-22 also appears to have a pathogenic role in 
autoimmune arthritis, particularly in promoting proinflammatory responses by 
synovial fibroblasts and osteoclastogenesis. The present study was undertaken to 
investigate whether the protection against joint damage afforded by ES-62 also 
reflects suppression of IL-22.
METHODS: The role(s) of IL-22 was assessed by investigating the effects of 
neutralizing anti-IL-22 antibodies and recombinant IL-22 (rIL-22) on 
proinflammatory cytokine production, synovial fibroblast responses, and joint 
damage in mice with CIA in the presence or absence of ES-62.
RESULTS: Neutralization of IL-22 during the initiation phase abrogated CIA, 
while administration of rIL-22 enhanced synovial fibroblast responses and 
exacerbated joint pathology. In contrast, after disease onset anti-IL-22 did not 
suppress progression, whereas administration of rIL-22 promoted resolution of 
inflammation. Consistent with these late antiinflammatory effects, the 
protection afforded by ES-62 was associated with elevated levels of IL-22 in the 
serum and joints that reflected a desensitization of the synovial fibroblast 
responses. Moreover, neutralization of IL-22 during the late effector stage of 
disease prevented ES-62-mediated desensitization of synovial fibroblast 
responses and protection against CIA.
CONCLUSION: IL-22 plays a dual role in CIA, being pathogenic during the 
initiation phase while acting to resolve inflammation and joint damage during 
established disease. Harnessing of the tissue repair properties of IL-22 by 
ES-62 highlights the potential for joint-targeted therapeutic modulation of 
synovial fibroblast responses and consequent protection against bone damage in 
RA.

© 2014 The Authors. Arthritis & Rheumatology is published by Wiley Periodicals, 
Inc. on behalf of the American College of Rheumatology.
