Interleukin-33 (IL-33) is associated with multiple diseases, including asthma, 
rheumatoid arthritis, tissue injuries and infections. Although IL-33 has been 
indicated to be involved in Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus) wound infection, 
little is known about how IL-33 is regulated as a mechanism to increase host 
defense against skin bacterial infections. To explore the underlying intricate 
mechanism we first evaluated the expression of IL-33 in skin from S. 
aureus-infected human patients. Compared to normal controls, IL-33 was 
abundantly increased in skin of S. aureus-infected patients. We next developed a 
S. aureus cutaneous infection mouse model and found that IL-33 was significantly 
increased in dermal macrophages of infected mouse skin. The expression of IL-33 
by macrophages was induced by staphylococcal peptidoglycan (PGN) and 
lipoteichoic acid (LTA) via activation of toll-like receptor 
2(TLR2)-mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)-AKT-signal transducer and 
activator of transcription 3(STAT3) signaling pathway as PGN and LTA failed to 
induce IL-33 in Tlr2-deficient peritoneal macrophages, and MAPK,AKT, STAT3 
inhibitors significantly decreased PGN- or LTA-induced IL-33. IL-33, in turn, 
acted on macrophages to induce microbicidal nitric oxygen (NO) release. This 
induction was dependent on inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) activation, as 
treatment of macrophages with an inhibitor of iNOS, aminoguanidine, 
significantly decreased IL-33-induced NO release. Moreover, aminoguanidine 
significantly blocked the capacity of IL-33 to inhibit the growth of S. aureus, 
and IL-33 silencing in macrophages significantly increased the survival of S. 
aureus in macrophages. Furthermore, the administration of IL-33-neutralizing 
antibody into mouse skin decreased iNOS production but increased the survival of 
S. aureus in skin. These findings reveal that IL-33 can promote antimicrobial 
capacity of dermal macrophages, thus enhancing antimicrobial defense against 
skin bacterial infections.
