INTRODUCTION: Clinical and preclinical studies have shown that supplementation 
with ω-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (ω-3 PUFAs) reduce joint destruction and 
inflammation present in rheumatoid arthritis (RA). However, the effects of 
individual ω-3 PUFAs on chronic arthritic pain have not been evaluated to date. 
Thus, our aim in this study was to examine whether purified docosahexaenoic acid 
(DHA, an ω-3 PUFA) reduces spontaneous pain-related behavior and knee edema and 
improves functional outcomes in a mouse model of knee arthritis.
METHODS: Unilateral arthritis was induced by multiple injections of Complete 
Freund's Adjuvant (CFA) into the right knee joints of male ICR adult mice. Mice 
that received CFA injections were then chronically treated from day 15 until day 
25 post-initial CFA injection with oral DHA (10, 30 and 100 mg/kg daily) or 
intraarticular DHA (25 and 50 μg/joint twice weekly). Spontaneous flinching of 
the injected extremity (considered as spontaneous pain-related behavior), 
vertical rearing and horizontal exploratory activity (considered as functional 
outcomes) and knee edema were assessed. To determine whether an endogenous 
opioid mechanism was involved in the therapeutic effect of DHA, naloxone (NLX, 
an opioid receptor antagonist, 3 mg/kg subcutaneously) was administered in 
arthritic mice chronically treated with DHA (30 mg/kg by mouth) at day 25 
post-CFA injection.
RESULTS: The intraarticular CFA injections resulted in increasing spontaneous 
flinching and knee edema of the ipsilateral extremity as well as worsening 
functional outcomes as time progressed. Chronic administration of DHA, given 
either orally or intraarticularly, significantly improved horizontal exploratory 
activity and reduced flinching behavior and knee edema in a dose-dependent 
manner. Administration of NLX did not reverse the antinociceptive effect of DHA.
CONCLUSIONS: To the best of our knowledge, this report is the first to 
demonstrate DHA's antinociceptive and anti-inflammatory effects as individual 
ω-3 PUFAs following sustained systemic and intraarticular administration in a 
mouse model of CFA-induced knee arthritis. The results suggest that DHA 
treatment may offer a new therapeutic approach to alleviate inflammation as well 
as a beneficial effect on pain-related functional disabilities in RA patients.
