ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Glycyrrhizae uralenis (GU) is often prescribed 
together with Cortex daphnes (CD) in traditional Chinese medicinal practice to 
increase the efficacy of CD on the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis (RA), but 
the reasons were still unknown. In order to clarify the rationality of 
herbaceous compatibility between CD and GU, the comparative evaluations on 
pharmacokinetic behaviors of daphnetin (a predominantly active ingredient in CD) 
after intragastric administration of CD and CD-GU (combination of CD and GU) 
extract were studied. In addition, the effects of glycyrrhizin and liquiritin, 
active ingredients of Glycyrrhiza triterpenes and Glycyrrhiza flavones 
respectively, on the pharmacokinetics of daphnetin were also investigated.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Five groups of rats were orally administered with CD 
extract, CD-GU extract, pure daphnetin, co-administration of daphnetin and 
glycyrrhizin as well as co-administration of daphnetin and liquiritin at the 
same single dose of daphnetin (20 mg/kg). The rat plasma concentrations of 
daphnetin were determined by our developed UPLC-MS/MS method. The 
pharmacokinetics of daphnetin in above groups were investigated and compared.
RESULTS: Comparing with oral administration of CD extract, AUC and Tmax of 
daphnetin significantly increased after giving CD-GU (p<0.05). In addition, in 
comparison to daphnetin alone, co-administration of daphnetin with liquiritin 
significantly increased the AUC and Cmax of daphnetin for ~1.5-fold, while 
co-administered with glycyrrhizin showed limited impact on the pharmacokinetics 
of daphnetin.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, it was found that liquiritin, one of the major 
components of GU, significantly enhanced the bioavailability of the main 
component daphnetin in CD. In addition, the bioavailability of daphnetin in the 
CD-GU prescription was also significantly higher than that in CD alone, which 
could be due to liquiritin. Such results explained the mechanism of the 
increased efficacy in treating RA with the combined use of CD and GU.
