INTRODUCTION: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic disease causing recurring 
inflammatory joint attacks. These attacks are characterized by macrophage 
infiltration contributing to joint destruction. Studies have shown that RA 
treatment efficacy is correlated to synovial macrophage number. The aim of this 
study was to experimentally validate the use of in vivo superparamagnetic iron 
oxide nanoparticle (SPION) labeled macrophages to evaluate RA treatment by MRI.
METHODS: The evolution of macrophages was monitored with and without 
dexamethasone (Dexa) treatment in rats. Two doses of 3 and 1 mg/kg Dexa were 
administered two and five days following induction of antigen induced arthritis. 
SPIONs (7 mg Fe/rat) were injected intravenously and the knees were imaged in 
vivo on days 6, 10 and 13. The MR images were scored for three parameters: SPION 
signal intensity, SPION distribution pattern and synovial oedema. Using 3D 
semi-automated software, the MR SPION signal was quantified. The efficacy of 
SPIONs and gadolinium chelate (Gd), an MR contrast agent, in illustrating 
treatment effects were compared. Those results were confirmed through 
histological measurements of number and area of macrophages and nanoparticle 
clusters using CD68 immunostaining and Prussian blue staining respectively.
RESULTS: Results show that the pattern and the intensity of SPION-labeled 
macrophages on MRI were altered by Dexa treatment. While the Dexa group had a 
uniform elliptical line surrounding an oedema pocket, the untreated group showed 
a diffused SPION distribution on day 6 post-induction. Dexa reduced the 
intensity of SPION signal 50-60% on days 10 and 13 compared to controls 
(P = 0.00008 and 0.002 respectively). Similar results were found when the signal 
was measured by the 3D tool. On day 13, the persisting low grade arthritis 
progression could not be demonstrated by Gd. Analysis of knee samples by 
Prussian blue and CD68 immunostaining confirmed in vivo SPION uptake by 
macrophages. Furthermore, CD68 immunostaining revealed that Dexa treatment 
significantly decreased the area and number of synovial macrophages. Prussian 
blue quantification corresponded to the macrophage measurements and both were in 
agreement with the MRI findings.
CONCLUSIONS: We have demonstrated the feasibility of MRI tracking of in vivo 
SPION-labeled macrophages to assess RA treatment effects.
