MicroRNAs have been shown to be important regulators of inflammatory and immune 
responses and are implicated in several immune disorders including systemic 
lupus erythematosus and rheumatoid arthritis, but their role in Lyme borreliosis 
remains unknown. We performed a microarray screen for expression of miRNAs in 
joint tissue from three mouse strains infected with Borrelia burgdorferi. This 
screen identified upregulation of miR-146a, a key negative regulator of NF-κB 
signaling, in all three strains, suggesting it plays an important role in the in 
vivo response to B. burgdorferi. Infection of B6 miR-146a-/- mice with B. 
burgdorferi revealed a critical nonredundant role of miR-146a in modulating Lyme 
arthritis without compromising host immune response or heart inflammation. The 
impact of miR-146a was specifically localized to the joint, and did not impact 
lesion development or inflammation in the heart. Furthermore, B6 miR-146a-/- 
mice had elevated levels of NF-κB-regulated products in joint tissue and serum 
late in infection. Flow cytometry analysis of various lineages isolated from 
infected joint tissue of mice showed that myeloid cell infiltration was 
significantly greater in B6 miR-146a-/- mice, compared to B6, during B. 
burgdorferi infection. Using bone marrow-derived macrophages, we found that 
TRAF6, a known target of miR-146a involved in NF-κB activation, was dysregulated 
in resting and B. burgdorferi-stimulated B6 miR-146a-/- macrophages, and 
corresponded to elevated IL-1β, IL-6 and CXCL1 production. This dysregulated 
protein production was also observed in macrophages treated with IL-10 prior to 
B. burgdorferi stimulation. Peritoneal macrophages from B6 miR-146a-/- mice also 
showed enhanced phagocytosis of B. burgdorferi. Together, these data show that 
miR-146a-mediated regulation of TRAF6 and NF-κB, and downstream targets such as 
IL-1β, IL-6 and CXCL1, are critical for modulation of Lyme arthritis during 
chronic infection with B. burgdorferi.
