OBJECTIVE: The immune response to post-translationally modified antigens is a 
key characteristic of rheumatoid arthritis. Carbamylation is such a 
posttranslational modification. Recently, we demonstrated that autoantibodies 
recognizing carbamylated proteins are present in sera of rheumatoid arthritis. 
The molecular mechanisms underlying the break of tolerance and hence the 
induction of anti-CarP antibody responses are unknown as well as their 
appearance in mouse models for systemic arthritis. Therefore we analyzed their 
appearance in the mouse collagen-induced arthritis model.
METHODS: collagen induced arthritis was induced by immunization with type II 
collagen in complete Freund's adjuvant. Arthritis severity was monitored by 
clinical scoring and anti-CarP antibody levels were determined by ELISA.
RESULTS: Anti-CarP antibodies were detectable in mice with collagen induced 
arthritis. We did not detect ACPA in mice with collagen induced arthritis. The 
specificity of the antibodies for carbamylated proteins was confirmed by 
inhibition assays and immunoblotting. Injection with complete Freund's adjuvant 
without type II collagen could also induce anti-CarP antibodies, however, in 
mice with arthritis, the anti-CarP antibody response was stronger and developed 
more rapidly. The onset of collagen induced arthritis was preceded by an 
increase of anti-CarP IgG2a levels in the serum.
CONCLUSION: In mice with collagen induced arthritis we did not observe an immune 
response against citrullinated antigens, but we did observe an immune response 
against carbamylated antigens. This anti-CarP response already appeared before 
disease onset, indicating that collagen induced arthritis can be used as an in 
vivo model to study anti-CarP antibodies. Our data also indicate that the 
tolerance to carbamylated proteins, in contrast to the response to citrullinated 
proteins, is easily broken and that arthritis boosts the immune response against 
these proteins. The anti-CarP response in mice with CIA can be used as a model 
for immune responses to post-translationally modified proteins.
