ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Clematichinenoside AR (AR) has been defined as a 
major active ingredient of triterpenoid saponins extracted from Clematidis Radix 
et Rhizoma, which is a traditional Chinese herbal medicine that has long been 
used in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). To further explore the 
mechanism of AR in the treatment of RA, we investigated whether its 
immunomodulatory effects are related to Treg-mediated suppression derived from 
Peyer׳s patches (PPs) in adjuvant induced arthritis (AIA) rat model.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: AR (8, 16, 32 mg/kg) was orally administered daily from 
Day 18 to Day 31 after immunization. The effect of AR on AIA rats was evaluated 
by hind paw swelling and histopathological examination. Percentages of 
CD4(+)CD25(+)Foxp3(+) T regulatory cells were determined by flow cytometry. 
Levels of IL-10, TGF-β1, IL-17A and TNF-α were measured by ELISA. Expressions of 
Foxp3 and RORγ in synovium were detected using immunohistochemical analysis.
RESULTS: AR treatment significantly reduced paw swelling of AIA rats, and 
histopathological analysis confirmed it could suppress severity of established 
arthritis. AR treatment upregulated the percentages of CD4(+)CD25(+)Foxp3(+) 
Treg cells among CD4+ T cells in PPs lymphocytes, and increased the levels of 
IL-10 and TGF-β1 secreted from ConA-activated PPs lymphocytes, whereas decreased 
the levels of IL-17 A and TNF-α. Similar tendency of circulating 
CD4(+)CD25(+)Foxp3(+) Treg cells percentages and serum cytokine levels were 
observed. Moreover, AR decreased the expression levels of Foxp3 and RORγ in 
joint synovial membrane.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, these results suggested AR has a potent protective 
effect on the progression of AIA, probably by augmenting CD4(+)CD25(+)Foxp3(+) 
Treg cells in PPs to induce immunosuppression, and modulating the balance 
between Treg cells and Th17 cells systemically. These findings may help to 
develop AR as a potent immunosuppressive agent for the treatment of RA.
