OBJECTIVE: We earlier found that TNFα but not interleukin (IL)-17 is 
indispensable in the pathogenesis of spontaneously occurring rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA)-like disease in our newly established FcγRIIB-deficient C57BL/6 
(B6) mouse model, designated KO1. Here, we examined the role of IL-6 in the 
pathogenesis of RA features in KO1, with particular reference to cartilage and 
bone destruction in arthritic joints.
METHODS: To evaluate the preventive effect of MR16-1, a rat anti-mouse IL-6 
receptor (IL-6R) mAb, 4-month-old preclinical KO1 mice were divided into three 
groups: the first treated with MR16-1 for 6 months, the second treated with 
normal rat IgG, as a control, and the third left untreated. The incidence and 
severity of arthritis, immunological abnormalities, and transcription levels of 
receptor activator of NF-κB ligand (RANKL), osteoprotegerin (OPG), and 
inflammatory cytokines/chemokines in ankle joint tissues were compared among the 
three groups. The therapeutic effect of MR16-1 was examined by treating 
7-month-old KO1 mice in the early stages of arthritis for 2 months.
RESULTS: Compared with the findings in the KO1 mice left untreated or treated 
with normal rat IgG, the development of arthritis was markedly suppressed in 
mice with MR16-1 treatment started from preclinical stages. The suppression was 
associated with the decrease in production of autoantibodies, rheumatoid factors 
(RF), and anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (CCP). Histologically, marked 
synovitis, pannus formation, and cartilage and bone destruction associated with 
the increase in tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP)-positive osteoclast 
generation were evident in the two control groups; however, these findings were 
virtually absent in MR16-1-treated mice. Real-time PCR analysis revealed that 
the up-regulated expression levels of MCP-1, IL-6, and TNFα, and the aberrantly 
high RANKL/OPG expression ratio in synovial joint tissues from the two control 
groups of mice with overt arthritis were significantly suppressed in 
MR16-1-treated mice. In mice with therapeutic MR16-1 treatment, there was no 
progression in arthritis score and the RANKL/OPG ratio in joint tissues was 
significantly suppressed.
CONCLUSIONS: Administration of an anti-IL-6R mAb ameliorated spontaneously 
occurring RA-like disease features, indicating that IL-6, as well as TNFα, plays 
a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of RA in KO1 mice. Current studies showed 
that, in addition to the role in enhancing autoantibody production, IL-6 
promotes synovial tissue inflammation and osteoclastogenesis, leading to the 
severe synovitis with pannus formation and the progressive cartilage and bone 
destruction in multiple joints.
