Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an autoimmune and progressive systemic disease of 
unknown etiology. Research shows that fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS) 
participate in the cartilage erosion, synovial hyperplasia, inflammatory 
cytokine secretion and suggests that fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS) display 
a crucial role in RA pathogenesis. Recent studies have suggested the role of the 
Wnt signaling pathway in the pathogenesis of RA. In previous study, we 
identified that increased methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MeCP2) reduced the 
secreted frizzled-related protein 4 (SFRP4) expression in FLS in Arthritic rat 
model and the DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) inhibitor 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine 
(5-azadC) could induce the SFRP4 expression, indicating that DNMT has a key role 
in the differential expression of SFRP4. MicroRNAs (MiRNAs), which are small 
non-coding RNAs, are involved in diverse biological functions, regulation of 
gene expression, pathogenesis of autoimmune disease and carcinogenesis. In light 
of the directly down-regulation of miR-152 on DNMT1 expression by targeting the 
3' untranslated regions of its transcript in nickel sulfide (NiS)-transformed 
human bronchial epithelial cells, we investigated whether miR-152 is aberrantly 
expressed and targets DNMT1 in FLS in Arthritic rat model. Our results 
demonstrated that the expression of miR-152 was specifically down-regulated in 
Arthritic rat model, whereas up-regulation of miR-152 in FLS resulted in a 
marked reduction of DNMT1 expression. Further experiments revealed that 
increased miR-152 indirectly up-regulated the SFRP4 expression, a negative 
regulator of WNT signaling pathway, by targeting the DNMT1. Moreover, activation 
of miR-152 expression in FLS could inhibit the canonical Wnt pathway activation 
and result in a significant decrease of FLS proliferation. MiR-152 and DNA 
methylation may provide molecular mechanisms for the activation of canonical Wnt 
pathway in RA. Combination of miR-152 and DNMT1 may be a promising treatment 
strategy for RA patients in which SFRP4 is inactivated.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. and Société française de biochimie et biologie 
Moléculaire (SFBBM). All rights reserved.
