BACKGROUND: Angiogenesis is an important pathophysiological process of chronic 
inflammation, especially in inflammatory arthritis. Quantitative measurement of 
changes in vascularization may improve the diagnosis and monitoring of 
arthritis. The aim of this work is the development of a 3D imaging and analysis 
framework for quantification of vascularization in experimental arthritis.
METHODS: High-resolution micro-computed tomography (μCT) was used to scan knee 
joints of arthritic human tumor necrosis factor transgenic (hTNFtg) mice and 
non-arthritic wild-type controls previously perfused with lead-containing 
contrast agent Microfil MV-122. Vessel segmentation was performed by combination 
of intensity-based (local adaptive thresholding) and form-based (multi-scale 
method) segmentation techniques. Four anatomically defined concentric spherical 
shells centered in the knee joint were used as analysis volumes of interest. 
Vessel density, density distribution as well as vessel thickness, surface, 
spacing and number were measured. Simulated digital vessel tree models were used 
for validation of the algorithms.
RESULTS: High-resolution μCT allows the quantitative assessment of the vascular 
tree in the knee joint during arthritis. Segmentation and analysis were highly 
automated but occasionally required manual corrections of the vessel 
segmentation close to the bone surfaces. Vascularization was significantly 
increased in arthritic hTNFtg mice compared to wild type controls. Precision 
errors for the morphologic parameters were smaller than 3% and 6% for intra- and 
interoperator analysis, respectively. Accuracy errors for vessel thickness were 
around 20% for vessels larger than twice the resolution of the scanner.
CONCLUSIONS: Arthritis-induced changes of the vascular tree, including detailed 
and quantitative description of the number of vessel branches, length of vessel 
segments and the bifurcation angle, can be detected by contrast-enhanced 
high-resolution μCT.
