BACKGROUND: The pre-symptomatic stage of Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is associated 
with pro-inflammatory cytokines and autoantibodies. High levels and epitope 
spread by Rheumatoid factors (RhF) and autoantibodies to citrullinated proteins 
signify progression towards disease expression. In established RA, the 
persistence of high autoantibody levels reflects production by both long-lived 
plasma cells and short-lived plasmablasts. Neither the relative contributions to 
pathogenesis by autoantibodies from either source, nor the factors responsible 
for deciding the fate of autoantigen specific 'parent' B-cells, is understood. 
Phenotypic markers identifying subsets of autoreactive B-cells are therefore of 
interest in understanding the origin and perpetuation of the autoimmune response 
in RA. One such phenotypic marker is the rat monoclonal antibody, 9G4, which 
recognises an idiotope on immunoglobuins derived from the inherently 
autoreactive VH-gene, VH4-34. We therefore investigated whether the 9G4 idiotope 
was expressed on autoantibodies in patients with RA.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Sera from 19 patients with established RA and 
those with <1year history of untreated polyarthritis either resolving into RA 
(n = 42) or non-RA diagnosis (n = 31) were included. Autoantibodies to cyclic 
citrullinated peptides (CCP), RhF and co-expression of the 9G4 idiotope were 
measured by ELISA. 9G4 recognised a population of anti-CCP antibodies in the 
majority of sera from patients with established disease and also in samples from 
patients with early disaese. 9G4+RhF levels were generally lower and not 
associated with positivity for, or levels of 9G4+CCP.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The persistence of 9G4+ immunoglobulins, of any 
isotype, in serum is rare. We describe here the novel finding of 9G4 expression 
on anti-CCP antibodies in patients from the earliest symptoms of RA through to 
established disease. Our results suggest that 9G4 expression on anti-CCP 
autoantibodies was not due to polyclonal expansion of VH4-34-encoded 
immunoglobulins. These studies may therefore provide a new focus for 
investigation into the evolution of the autoimmune response in RA patients.
