PURPOSE: To explore the experiences of today's patients with early rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA) with respect to dilemmas of everyday life, especially regarding 
patterns of participation restrictions in valued life activities.
METHODS: A total of 48 patients, aged 20-63, three years post-RA diagnosis were 
interviewed using the Critical Incident Technique. Transcribed interviews were 
condensed into meaningful units describing actions/situations. These 
descriptions were linked to ICF participation codes according to the 
International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF) linking 
rules.
RESULTS: Dilemmas in everyday life were experienced in domestic life, 
interpersonal interactions and relationships, community, social and civic life. 
Most dilemmas were experienced in domestic life, including participation 
restrictions in, e.g. gardening, repairing houses, shovelling snow, watering pot 
plants, sewing or walking the dog. Also many dilemmas were experienced related 
to recreation and leisure within the domain community, social and civic life. 
The different dilemmas were often related to each other. For instance, dilemmas 
related to community life were combined with dilemmas within mobility, such as 
lifting and carrying objects.
CONCLUSIONS: Participation restrictions in today's RA patients are complex. Our 
results underline that the health care needs to be aware of the patients' own 
preferences and goals to support the early multi-professional interventions in 
clinical practice. Implications of Rehabilitation Today's rheumatoid arthritis 
(RA) patients experience participation restrictions in activities not included 
in International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF) core 
set for RA or in traditionally questionnaires with predefined activities. The 
health care need to be aware of the patients' own preferences and goals to meet 
the individual needs and optimize the rehabilitation in early RA in clinical 
practice.
