INTRODUCTION: During the progression of rheumatoid arthritis (RA), there are 
frequent but intermittent flares in which the joint becomes acutely inflamed and 
painful. Although a number of drug therapies are currently used to treat RA, 
their effectiveness is variable and side effects are common. Endocannabinoids 
have the potential to ameliorate joint pain and inflammation, but these 
beneficial effects are limited by their rapid degradation. One enzyme 
responsible for endocannabinoid breakdown is fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH). 
The present study examined whether URB597, a potent and selective FAAH 
inhibitor, could alter inflammation and pain in a mouse model of acute 
synovitis.
METHODS: Acute joint inflammation was induced in male C57BL/6 mice by 
intra-articular injection of 2% kaolin/2% carrageenan. After 24 hr, articular 
leukocyte kinetics and blood flow were used as measures of inflammation, while 
hindlimb weight bearing and von Frey hair algesiometry were used as measures of 
joint pain. The effects of local URB597 administration were then determined in 
the presence or absence of either the cannabinoid (CB)1 receptor antagonist 
AM251, or the CB2 receptor antagonist AM630.
RESULTS: URB597 decreased leukocyte rolling and adhesion, as well as 
inflammation-induced hyperaemia. However, these effects were only apparent at 
low doses and the effects of URB597 were absent at higher doses. In addition to 
the anti-inflammatory effects of URB597, fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH) 
inhibition improved both hindlimb weight bearing and von Frey hair withdrawal 
thresholds. The anti-inflammatory effects of URB597 on leukocyte rolling and 
vascular perfusion were blocked by both CB1 and CB2 antagonism, while the effect 
on leukocyte adherence was independent of cannabinoid receptor activation. The 
analgesic effects of URB597 were CB1 mediated.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that the endocannabinoid system of the joint 
can be harnessed to decrease acute inflammatory reactions and the concomitant 
pain associated with these episodes.
