BACKGROUND: We have previously reported that dephnetin is therapeutically 
effective in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in collagen-induced 
arthritis (CIA) rat model. However, the molecular mechanism and the effect of 
daphnetin on demethylating proapoptotic genes in the synovial cells remains 
further clarified. This study may provide a deeper insight into the medicinal 
application of daphnetin as a treatment for RA.
METHODS: (1) The proliferation inhibition of CIA rat synovial cells was 
determined by an MTT 
(3-(4,5)-dimethylthiahiazo(-z-y1)-3,5-di-phenyterazoliumromide) assay; (2) 
Methylation specific PCR (MSP) was used to measure the methylation of the 
proapoptotic genes DR3 (death receptor 3), PDCD5 (programmed cell death 5), FasL 
and p53; (3) Real time-PCR was performed to determine the mRNA expression of 
DR3, PDCD5, FasL, p53 and DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs) DNMT1, DNMT3a and 
DNMT3b; (4) Flow cytometry was applied to detect the protein expression of the 
DR3, PDCD5, FasL and p53; (5) The apoptotic rate of synovial cells was assessed 
by flow cytometry with Annexin V and propidium iodide (PI); (6) Scanning 
electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) were used 
to observe the changes of CIA rat synovial cell structure.
RESULTS: (1) In the range of 1.25 μg/mL to 40 μg/mL, daphnetin and 5-aza-dc had 
a dose-dependent and time-dependent degree of inhibition to the CIA rat synovial 
cells. (2) Daphnetin and 5-aza-dc had a demethylating role on the proapoptotic 
genes DR3, PDCD5, FasL and p53 of CIA rat synovial cells. (3) Daphnetin and 
5-aza-dc decreased the gene expression of methyltransferases DNMT1, DNMT3a and 
DNMT3b, and increased expression of proapoptotic genes DR3, PDCD5, FasL and p53, 
which translated into an increased protein expression of DR3, PDCD5, FasL and 
p53. (4) Daphnetin and 5-aza-dc changed the structure of CIA rat synovial cells 
to show apoptotic changes and increased the rate of apoptosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Daphnetin can reduce the expression of DNMT1, DNMT3a and DNMT3b, 
which could result in the proapoptotic genes DR3, PDCD5, FasL and p53 being 
demethylated. Therefore, daphnetin can increase proapoptotic gene and protein 
expression resulting in structural apoptotic changes and an increase in early 
and late CIA rat synovial cell apoptosis.
