Bone displays suppressed osteogenesis in inflammatory diseases such as sepsis 
and rheumatoid arthritis. However, the underlying mechanisms have not yet been 
clearly explained. To identify the gene expression patterns in the bone, we 
performed Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array with RNA isolated from mouse 
femurs 4 h after lipopolysaccharide (LPS) administration. The gene expressions 
were confirmed with real-time PCR. The serum concentration of the N-terminal 
propeptide of type I collagen (PINP), a bone-formation marker, was determined 
using ELISA. A total of 1003 transcripts were upregulated and 159 transcripts 
were downregulated (more than twofold upregulation or downregulation). Increased 
expression levels of the inflammation-related genes interleukin-6 (IL-6), 
interleukin-1β (IL-1β) and tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α) were confirmed from 
in the period 4 h to 72 h after LPS administration using real-time PCR. Gene 
ontogene analysis found four bone-related categories involved in four biological 
processes: system development, osteoclast differentiation, ossification and bone 
development. These processes involved 25 upregulated genes. In the KEGG 
database, we further analyzed the transforming growth factor β (TGF-β) pathway, 
which is strongly related to osteogenesis. The upregulated bone morphogenetic 
protein 2 (BMP2) and downregulated inhibitor of DNA binding 4 (Id4) expressions 
were further confirmed by real-time PCR after LPS stimulation. The osteoblast 
function was determined through examination of the expression levels of core 
binding factor 1 (Cbfa1) and osteocalcin (OC) in bone tissues and serum PINP 
from 4 h to 72 h after LPS administration. The expressions of OC and Cbfa1 
decreased 6 h after administration (p < 0.05). Significantly suppressed PINP 
levels were observed in the later stage (from 8 h to 72 h, p < 0.05) but not in 
the early stage (4 h or 6 h, p > 0.05) of LPS stimulation. The results of this 
study suggest that LPS induces elevated expressions of skeletal system 
development- and osteoclast differentiation-related genes and inflammation genes 
at an early stage in the bone. The perturbed functions of these two groups of 
genes may lead to a faint change in osteogenesis at an early stage of LPS 
stimulation. Suppressed bone formation was found at later stages in response to 
LPS stimulation.
