BACKGROUND: Myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) are innate immune cells 
capable of suppressing T-cell responses. We previously reported the presence of 
MDSCs with a granulocytic phenotype in the synovial fluid (SF) of mice with 
proteoglycan (PG)-induced arthritis (PGIA), a T cell-dependent autoimmune model 
of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). However, the limited amount of SF-MDSCs precluded 
investigations into their therapeutic potential. The goals of this study were to 
develop an in vitro method for generating MDSCs similar to those found in SF and 
to reveal the therapeutic effect of such cells in PGIA.
METHODS: Murine bone marrow (BM) cells were cultured for 3 days in the presence 
of granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), interleukin-6 
(IL-6), and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF). The phenotype of 
cultured cells was analyzed using flow cytometry, microscopy, and biochemical 
methods. The suppressor activity of BM-MDSCs was tested upon co-culture with 
activated T cells. To investigate the therapeutic potential of BM-MDSCs, the 
cells were injected into SCID mice at the early stage of adoptively transferred 
PGIA, and their effects on the clinical course of arthritis and PG-specific 
immune responses were determined.
RESULTS: BM cells cultured in the presence of GM-CSF, IL-6, and G-CSF became 
enriched in MDSC-like cells that showed greater phenotypic heterogeneity than 
MDSCs present in SF. BM-MDSCs profoundly inhibited both antigen-specific and 
polyclonal T-cell proliferation primarily via production of nitric oxide. 
Injection of BM-MDSCs into mice with PGIA ameliorated arthritis and reduced 
PG-specific T-cell responses and serum antibody levels.
CONCLUSIONS: Our in vitro enrichment strategy provides a SF-like, but controlled 
microenvironment for converting BM myeloid precursors into MDSCs that potently 
suppress both T-cell responses and the progression of arthritis in a mouse model 
of RA. Our results also suggest that enrichment of BM in MDSCs could improve the 
therapeutic efficacy of BM transplantation in RA.
