Apart from their role in the immune defence against pathogens evidence of a role 
of antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) in autoimmune diseases has accumulated in the 
past years. The aim of this project was to examine the functional impact of the 
human cathelicidin LL-37 and the mouse cathelicidin-related AMP (CRAMP) on the 
pathogenesis of lupus and arthritis. Serum LL-37 and anti-LL-37 levels were 
measured by ELISA in healthy donors and patients with Systemic Lupus 
Erythematosus (SLE) and Rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Pristane-induced lupus was 
induced in female wild type (WT) and cathelicidin-deficient (CRAMP-/-) mice. 
Serum levels of anti-Sm/RNP, anti-dsDNA, and anti-histone were determined via 
ELISA, cytokines in sera and peritoneal lavages were measured via Multiplex. 
Expression of Interferon I stimulated genes (ISG) was determined by real-time 
PCR. Collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) was induced in male WT and CRAMP-/- mice 
and arthritis severity was visually scored and analysed histomorphometrically by 
OsteoMeasure software. Serum levels of anti-LL-37 were higher in SLE-patients 
compared to healthy donors or patients with RA. However, no correlation to 
markers of disease activity or organ involvement was observed. No significant 
differences of autoantibody or cytokine/chemokine levels, or of expression of 
ISGs were observed between WT and CRAMP-/- mice after pristane-injection. 
Furthermore, lung and kidney pathology did not differ in the absence of CRAMP. 
Incidence and severity of CIA and histological parameters (inflammation, 
cartilage degradation, and bone erosion) were not different in WT and CRAMP-/- 
mice. Although cathelicidins are upregulated in mouse models of lupus and 
arthritis, cathelicidin-deficiency did not persistently affect the diseases. 
Also in patients with SLE, autoantibodies against cathelicidins did not 
correlate with disease manifestation. Reactivity against cathelicidins in lupus 
and arthritis could thus be an epiphenomenon caused by extensive overexpression 
in blood and affected tissues. In addition, other cationic AMPs could 
functionally compensate for the deficiency of cathelicidins.
