OBJECTIVE: Density of sympathetic nerve fibers decreases in inflamed arthritic 
tissue tested by immunoreactivity towards tyrosine-hydroxylase (TH, 
catecholaminergic key enzyme). Since sympathetic nerve fibers may change 
phenotype from catecholaminergic to cholinergic (example: sweat glands), loss of 
nerve fibers may relate to undetectable TH. We aimed to investigate possible 
catecholaminergic-to-cholinergic transition of sympathetic nerve fibers in 
synovial tissue of animals with arthritis, and patients with rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA) and osteoarthritis (OA), and we wanted to find a possible 
transition factor.
METHODS: Nerve fibers were detected by immunofluorescence towards TH 
(catecholaminergic) and vesicular acetylcholine transporter (cholinergic). 
Co-culture experiments with sympathetic ganglia and lymphocytes or osteoclast 
progenitors were designed to find stimulators of 
catecholaminergic-to-cholinergic transition (including gene expression 
profiling).
RESULTS: In mouse joints, an increased density of cholinergic relative to 
catecholaminergic nerve fibers appeared towards day 35 after immunization, but 
most nerve fibers were located in healthy joint-adjacent skin or muscle and 
almost none in inflamed synovial tissue. In humans, cholinergic fibers are more 
prevalent in OA synovial tissue than in RA. Co-culture of sympathetic ganglia 
with osteoclast progenitors obtained from healthy but not from arthritic animals 
induced catecholaminergic-to-cholinergic transition. Osteoclast mRNA microarray 
data indicated that leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) is a candidate transition 
factor, which was confirmed in ganglia experiments, particularly, in the 
presence of progesterone.
CONCLUSION: In humans and mice, catecholaminergic-to-cholinergic sympathetic 
transition happens in less inflamed tissue but not in inflamed arthritic tissue. 
Under healthy conditions, presence of cholinergic sympathetic nerve fibers may 
support the cholinergic anti-inflammatory influence recently described.
