BACKGROUND: Homeostatic B Cell-Attracting chemokine 1 (BCA-1) otherwise known as 
CXCL13 is constitutively expressed in secondary lymphoid organs by follicular 
dendritic cells (FDC) and macrophages. It is the only known ligand for the CXCR5 
receptor, which is expressed on mature B cells, follicular helper T cells (Tfh), 
Th17 cells and regulatory T (Treg) cells. Aberrant expression of CXCL13 within 
ectopic germinal centers has been linked to the development of autoimmune 
disorders (e.g. Rheumatoid Arthritis, Multiple Sclerosis, Systemic Lupus 
Erythematosis). We, therefore, hypothesized that antibody-mediated disruption of 
the CXCL13 signaling pathway would interfere with the formation of ectopic 
lymphoid follicles in the target organs and inhibit autoimmune disease 
progression. This work describes pre-clinical development of human anti-CXCL13 
antibody MAb 5261 and includes therapeutic efficacy data of its mouse 
counterpart in murine models of autoimmunity.
RESULTS: We developed a human IgG1 monoclonal antibody, MAb 5261 that 
specifically binds to human, rodent and primate CXCL13 with an affinity of 
approximately 5 nM and is capable of neutralizing the activity of CXCL13 from 
these various species in in vitro functional assays. For in vivo studies we have 
engineered a chimeric antibody to contain the same human heavy and light chain 
variable genes along with mouse constant regions. Treatment with this antibody 
led to a reduction in the number of germinal centers in mice immunized with 
4-Hydroxy-3-nitrophenylacetyl hapten conjugated to Keyhole Limpet Hemocyanin 
(NP-KLH) and, in adoptive transfer studies, interfered with the trafficking of B 
cells to the B cell areas of mouse spleen. Furthermore, this mouse anti-CXCL13 
antibody demonstrated efficacy in a mouse model of Rheumatoid arthritis 
(Collagen-Induced Arthritis (CIA)) and Th17-mediated murine model of Multiple 
Sclerosis (passively-induced Experimental Autoimmune Encephalomyelitis (EAE)).
CONCLUSIONS: We developed a novel therapeutic antibody targeting CXCL13-mediated 
signaling pathway for the treatment of autoimmune disorders.
