BACKGROUND: Caesalpinia sappan L. extracts exhibit great therapeutic potential, 
and have been shown to have analgesic and anti-inflammatory properties. This 
study aimed to understand the anti-rheumatoid activity of brazilin that was 
isolated from ethyl acetate extract of C. sappan L. The evaluations were 
conducted in mice with type-II collagen-induced arthritis (CIA).
METHODS: Brazilin was purified via preparative HPLC and identified by mass 
spectrometry and 1H/13C NMR analysis. DBA/1J mice were divided into four groups 
(n=10). Three groups of mice received intradermal injections of inducer bovine 
type-II collagen (BTIIC; 2 mg/ml in 0.05 ml acetic acid) and 0.1 ml of booster 
complete Freund's adjuvant (CFA). A second injection of BTIIC with booster 
incomplete Freund's adjuvant (ICFA) was given subsequently after 21 days. On 
22nd day, purified brazilin (10 mg/kg body weight) or the disease-modifying 
anti-rheumatic drug methotrexate (3 mg/kg body weight) was administered 
intraperitoneally daily or every three days for 21 days, respectively to two 
groups of mice. At the 42nd day, mice sera were collected, and the levels of 
pro-inflammatory cytokines and stress enzyme markers in serum were measured 
using standard immunoassay methods. The microstructure and morphometric analyses 
of the bones were assessed using high-resolution microfocal computed tomography.
RESULTS: Brazilin isolated from C. sappan reduced the arthritis index score and 
the extent of acute inflammatory paw edema in CIA-mice. The bone mineral density 
was significantly (p<0.05) lower in only-CIA mice, and appeared to increase 
commensurate with methotrexate and brazilin administration. Brazilin prevented 
joint destruction, surface erosion, and enhanced bone formation as revealed by 
microstructural examinations. Brazilin markedly attenuated mouse CIA and reduced 
the serum levels of inflammatory cytokines including TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-6.
CONCLUSIONS: Brazilin purified from C. sappan L. shows protective efficacy in 
CIA mouse, and may be useful to treat chronic inflammatory disorders including 
rheumatoid arthritis.
