We previously demonstrated that blocking hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) 
receptor/c-Met signaling inhibited arthritis and articular bone destruction in 
mouse models of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). In the present study, we investigated 
the role of c-Met signaling in osteoblast differentiation using the C2C12 
myoblast cell line derived from murine satellite cells and the MC3T3-E1 murine 
pre-osteoblast cell line. Osteoblast differentiation was induced by treatment 
with bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)-2 or osteoblast-inducer reagent in the 
presence or absence of either HGF antagonist (NK4) or c-Met inhibitor (SU11274). 
Osteoblast differentiation was confirmed by Runx2 expression, and alkaline 
phosphatase (ALP) and osteocalcin production by the cells. Production of ALP, 
osteocalcin and HGF was verified by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Runx2 
expression was confirmed by reverse transcription-PCR analysis. The 
phosphorylation status of ERK1/2, AKT, and Smads was determined by Western blot 
analysis. Both NK4 and SU11274 enhanced Runx2 expression, and ALP and 
osteocalcin production but suppressed HGF production in BMP-2-stimulated C2C12 
cells. SU11274 also enhanced ALP and osteocalcin production in 
osteoblast-inducer reagent-stimulated MC3T3-E1 cells. SU11274 inhibited ERK1/2 
and AKT phosphorylation in HGF-stimulated C2C12 cells. This result suggested 
that ERK and AKT were functional downstream of the c-Met signaling pathway. 
However, both mitogen-activated protein kinase/ERK kinase (MEK) and 
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) inhibitor suppressed osteocalcin and HGF 
production in BMP-2-stimulated C2C12 cells. Furthermore, SU11274, MEK, and PI3K 
inhibitor suppressed Smad phosphorylation in BMP-2-stimulated C2C12 cells. These 
results indicate that although the c-Met-MEK-ERK-Smad and c-Met-PI3K-AKT-Smad 
signaling pathways positively regulate osteoblast differentiation, c-Met 
signaling negatively regulates osteoblast differentiation, independent of the 
MEK-ERK-Smad and PI3K-AKT-Smad pathways. Therefore, blocking c-Met signaling 
might serve as a therapeutic strategy for the repair of destructed bone in 
patients with RA.
