Arthritogenic alphaviruses such as Ross River virus (RRV) and chikungunya virus 
(CHIKV) cause large-scale epidemics of severe musculoskeletal disease and have 
been progressively expanding their global distribution. Since its introduction 
in July 2014, CHIKV now circulates in the United States. The hallmark of 
alphavirus disease is crippling pain and inflammation of the joints, a similar 
immunopathology to rheumatoid arthritis. The use of glycans as novel 
therapeutics is an area of research that has increased in recent years. Here, we 
describe the promising therapeutic potential of the glycosaminoglycan (GAG)-like 
molecule pentosan polysulfate (PPS) to alleviate virus-induced arthritis. Mouse 
models of RRV and CHIKV disease were used to characterize the extent of 
cartilage damage in infection and investigate the potential of PPS to treat 
disease. This was assessed using histological analysis, real-time PCR, and 
fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS). Alphaviral infection resulted in 
cartilage destruction, the severity of which was alleviated by PPS therapy 
during RRV and CHIKV clinical disease. The reduction in cartilage damage 
corresponded with a significant reduction in immune infiltrates. Using multiplex 
bead arrays, PPS treatment was found to have significantly increased the 
anti-inflammatory cytokine interleukin-10 and reduced proinflammatory cytokines, 
typically correlated with disease severity. Furthermore, we reveal that the 
severe RRV-induced joint pathology, including thinning of articular cartilage 
and loss of proteoglycans in the cartilage matrix, was diminished with 
treatment. PPS is a promising new therapy for alphavirus-induced arthritis, 
acting to preserve the cartilage matrix, which is damaged during alphavirus 
infection. Overall, the data demonstrate the potential of glycotherapeutics as a 
new class of treatment for infectious arthritis.
IMPORTANCE: The hallmark of alphavirus disease is crippling pain and joint 
arthritis, which often has an extended duration. In the past year, CHIKV has 
expanded into the Americas, with approximately 1 million cases reported to date, 
whereas RRV continues to circulate in the South Pacific. Currently, there is no 
licensed specific treatment for alphavirus disease, and the increasing spread of 
infection highlights an urgent need for therapeutic intervention strategies. 
Pentosan polysulfate (PPS) is a glycan derivative that is orally bioavailable, 
has few toxic side effects, and is currently licensed under the name Elmiron for 
the treatment of cystitis in the United States. Our findings show that RRV 
infection damages the articular cartilage, including a loss of proteoglycans 
within the joint. Furthermore, treatment with PPS reduced the severity of both 
RRV- and CHIKV-induced musculoskeletal disease, including a reduction in 
inflammation and joint swelling, suggesting that PPS is a promising candidate 
for drug repurposing for the treatment of alphavirus-induced arthritis.
