CTLA4Ig has therapeutic potential for rheumatoid arthritis patients unresponsive 
to methotrexate (MTX) or TNF-α blockers. However, recombinant CTLA4Ig proteins 
are short acting and expensive. Adipose tissue-derived mesenchymal stem cells 
(ASCs) present an ideal stem cell source for practical regenerative medicine due 
to their abundant availability and their beneficial properties including 
immunomodulation, homing activity, paracrine effects, and differentiation 
ability. Therefore, we aimed to determine whether CTLA4Ig and human ASCs show 
synergistic effects on immunomodulation and clinical improvement of sustained 
severe rheumatoid arthritis in a mouse model. hASCs overexpressing CTLA4Ig 
(CTLA4Ig-hASC) were serially transplanted into mice with collagen-induced 
arthritis. Arthritic mice were subjected to four treatments based on their 
arthritis score on day 62 postimmunization: control (C group), hASC (H group), 
CTLA4Ig-hASC (CT group), and MTX (MTX group). A group of healthy mice was used 
as a normal control (N). Mice in the N and C groups were infused with 150 µl 
saline, and 2 × 10(6) hASCs or CTLA4Ig-hASCs in 150 µl of saline were 
intravenously administered to those in the H and CT groups, respectively, on 
days 63, 70, 77, and 84 after CII immunization. About 1 mg/kg of methotrexate 
was intraperitoneally administered to the MTX group three times a week for 4 
weeks. Serial hASC and CTLA4Ig-hASC transplantation modulated various cytokines 
and chemokines related to the development of rheumatoid arthritis. Both 
treatments protected against destruction of cartilage, with CTLA4Ig-hASCs being 
most effective. Serum levels of CII autoantibodies and C-telopeptide of type II 
collagen were significantly low in the group transplanted with CTLA4Ig-hASCs. In 
vitro, ASC and CTLA4Ig-hASC treatment significantly decreased T-bet and GATA-3 
expression in splenocytes from arthritic mice, and CTLA4Ig-hASC treatment 
significantly increased the ratio of Treg/Th17 
(CD4(+)CD25(+)FoxP3(+)/CD4(+)CD25(+)RORγt) cells. Serial hASC and CTLA4Ig-hASC 
transplantation offers promising treatment for rheumatoid arthritis, and 
CTLA4Ig-hASCs showed stronger therapeutic effects than nontransduced hASCs.
