ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: In traditional Chinese medicine, Gentiana 
macrophylla Pall have been prescribed for the treatment of pain and inflammatory 
conditions. In addition, it is a common Tibetan medicinal herb used for the 
treatment of tonsillitis, urticaria, and rheumatoid arthritis (RA), while the 
flowers of G. macrophylla Pall have been traditionally treated as an 
anti-inflammatory agent to clear heat in Mongolian medicine. The secoiridoid 
glycosides and their derivatives are the primary active components of G. 
macrophylla and have been demonstrated to be effective as anti-inflammatory 
agents.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Solvent extraction and D101 macroporous resin columns 
were employed to concentratethe gentiopicroside. Gentiopicroside cytotoxicity 
was assessed by 3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide 
(MTT) assay; the toxicity of gentiopicroside in chondrocytes was reconfirmed 
using Hoechst staining. Western blotting, reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain 
reaction (RT-PCR) and immunohistochemistry were utilized to explore the 
protective effects and mechanisms of gentiopicroside prevents interleukin-1 beta 
induced inflammation response in rat articular chondrocyte.
RESULTS: The MTT assay demonstrated that 50, 500, and 1,500 μg/mL of 
gentiopicroside exhibited no significant toxicity to chondrocytes (P>0.05) after 
24h. Using immunohistochemistry, ELISA, RT-PCR, Western blot method to explore 
the protective effect and mechanism of gentiopicroside on chondrocytes induced 
by IL-1β. The results showed some pathways of IL-1β signal transduction were 
inhibited by gentiopicroside in rat chondrocytes: p38, ERK and JNK. Meanwhile, 
gentiopicroside showed inhibition in the IL-1β-induced release of MMPs while 
increasing Collagen type II expression.
CONCLUSIONS: The current study demonstrated that gentiopicroside exhibited a 
potent protective effect on IL-1β induced inflammation response in rat articular 
chondrocyte. Thus, gentiopicroside could be a potential therapeutic strategy for 
treatment of OA.
