Patients with systemic inflammatory diseases (e.g., rheumatoid arthritis, 
inflammatory bowel disease, chronic liver disease) commonly develop debilitating 
symptoms (i.e., sickness behaviors) that arise from changes in brain function. 
The microbiota-gut-brain axis alters brain function and probiotic ingestion can 
influence behavior. However, how probiotics do this remains unclear. We have 
previously described a novel periphery-to-brain communication pathway in the 
setting of peripheral organ inflammation whereby monocytes are recruited to the 
brain in response to systemic TNF-α signaling, leading to microglial activation 
and subsequently driving sickness behavior development. Therefore, we 
investigated whether probiotic ingestion (i.e., probiotic mixture VSL#3) alters 
this periphery-to-brain communication pathway, thereby reducing subsequent 
sickness behavior development. Using a well characterized mouse model of liver 
inflammation, we now show that probiotic (VSL#3) treatment attenuates sickness 
behavior development in mice with liver inflammation without affecting disease 
severity, gut microbiota composition, or gut permeability. Attenuation of 
sickness behavior development was associated with reductions in microglial 
activation and cerebral monocyte infiltration. These events were paralleled by 
changes in markers of systemic immune activation, including decreased 
circulating TNF-α levels. Our observations highlight a novel pathway through 
which probiotics mediate cerebral changes and alter behavior. These findings 
allow for the potential development of novel therapeutic interventions targeted 
at the gut microbiome to treat inflammation-associated sickness behaviors in 
patients with systemic inflammatory diseases.
SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: This research shows that probiotics, when eaten, can 
improve the abnormal behaviors (including social withdrawal and immobility) that 
are commonly associated with inflammation. Probiotics are able to cause this 
effect within the body by changing how the immune system signals the brain to 
alter brain function. These findings broaden our understanding of how probiotics 
may beneficially affect brain function in the context of inflammation occurring 
within the body and may open potential new therapeutic alternatives for the 
treatment of these alterations in behavior that can greatly affect patient 
quality of life.
