OBJECTIVE: To observe the effect of moxibustion intervention on the expression 
of toll-like receptor-4 (TLR 4), myeloid differentiation factor 88(MyD 88), and 
nuclear factor kappa B p 65 (NF-κB p 65) genes of knee-joint synovial cells in 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) rats, so as to explore its molecular mechanism 
underlying improving RA.
METHODS: Forty SD rats were randomly divided into normal control, RA model, 
moxibustion and medication groups (n = 10). The RA model was duplicated by 
raising the rats in a windy, cold and wet environment, followed by injecting 
Freund's complete adjuvant (0. 15 mL) into the rat's foot. Moxibustion was 
applied to "Shenshu" (BL 23) and "Zusanli" (ST 36) for 20 min, once daily for 15 
days. Rats of the medication group were treated by intragastric administration 
of tripterygium wilfordii (8. 75 mL/kg), once daily for 15 days. Pathological 
changes of the synovial tissues were detected by H. E. stain, the contents of 
serum TNF-α and IL-1 detected by radioimmunoassay, and the expression levels of 
TLR 4 mRNA, MyD 88 mRNA and TRAF-6 mRNA of synovial tissue were analyzed by real 
time-PCR, and the NF-κB p 65 immunoactivity was assayed by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: In comparison with the normal control group, the synovial tissue of the 
knee-joint was impaired remarkably and infiltrated by numerous inflammatory 
cells, and the synovial surface got thickening because of hyperplasia in the 
model group. Following moxibustion and medication, these situations such as 
synovial infiltration of inflammatory, synovial cell proliferation were 
alleviated. The serum TNF-α and IL-1 contents and synovial TLR 4 mRNA, MyD 88 
mRNA, TRAF-6 mRNA and NF-κB p 65 expression levels were remarkably higher in the 
model group than in the control group(P<0. 01). After moxibustion and 
medication, the contents of serum TNF-α and IL-1, the expression levels of TLR 4 
mRNA, MyD 88 mRNA, TRAF-6 mRNA and NF-κB p 65 were significantly 
down-regulated(P<0. 01, P<0. 05).
CONCLUSION: Moxibustion intervention can improve pathological changes of the 
knee-joint synovial membrane tissue in RA rats, which may be related with its 
effect in inhibiting abnormal activation of TLR 4-MyD 88-NF-κB pathway in 
synovial tissue.
