Periodontal disease (Periodontitis) is a serious disease that affects a majority 
of adult Americans and is associated with other systemic diseases, including 
diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis, and other inflammatory diseases. While great 
efforts have been devoted toward understanding the pathogenesis of 
periodontitis, there remains a pressing need for developing potent therapeutic 
strategies for targeting this pervasive and destructive disease. In this study, 
we utilized novel adeno-associated virus (AAV)-mediated Atp6v1c1 knockdown gene 
therapy to treat bone erosion and inflammatory caused by periodontitis in mouse 
model. Atp6v1c1 is a subunit of the V-ATPase complex and regulator of the 
assembly of the V0 and V1 domains of the V-ATPase complex. We demonstrated 
previously that Atp6v1c1 has an essential function in osteoclast mediated bone 
resorption. We hypothesized that Atp6v1c1 may be an ideal target to prevent the 
bone erosion and inflammation caused by periodontitis. To test the hypothesis, 
we employed AAV RNAi knockdown of Atp6v1c1 gene expression to prevent bone 
erosion and gingival inflammation simultaneously. We found that lesion-specific 
injection of AAV-shRNA-Atp6v1c1 into the periodontal disease lesions protected 
against bone erosion (>85%) and gingival inflammation caused by P. gingivalis 
W50 infection. AAV-mediated Atp6v1c1 knockdown dramatically reduced osteoclast 
numbers and inhibited the infiltration of dendritic cells and macrophages in the 
bacteria-induced inflammatory lesions in periodontitis. Silencing of Atp6v1c1 
expression also prevented the expressions of osteoclast-related genes and 
pro-inflammatory cytokine genes. Our data suggests that AAV-shRNA-Atp6v1c1 
treatment can significantly attenuate the bone erosion and inflammation caused 
by periodontitis, indicating the dual function of AAV-shRNA-Atp6v1c1 as an 
inhibitor of bone erosion mediated by osteoclasts, and as an inhibitor of 
inflammation through down-regulation of pro-inflammatory cytokine expression. 
This study demonstrated that Atp6v1c1 RNAi knockdown gene therapy mediated by 
AAV-shRNA-Atp6v1c1 is a promising novel therapeutic approach for the treatment 
of bone erosion and inflammatory related diseases, such as periodontitis and 
rheumatoid arthritis.
