INTRODUCTION: Oxidative stress plays a role in the pathogenesis of rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA). Anthocyanin is a plant antioxidant. We investigated the 
therapeutic effects of anthocyanin extracted from black soybean seed coats 
(AEBS) in a murine model of collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) and human 
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and explored possible mechanisms by 
which AEBS might exert anti-arthritic effects.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: CIA was induced in DBA/1J mice. Cytokine levels were 
measured via enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays. Joints were assessed in terms 
of arthritis incidence, clinical arthritis scores, and histological features. 
The extent of oxidative stress in affected joints was determined by measuring 
the levels of nitrotyrosine and inducible nitric oxide synthase. NF-κB activity 
was assayed by measuring the ratio of phosphorylated IκB to total IκB via 
Western blotting. Th17 cells were stained with antibodies against CD4, IL-17, 
and STAT3. Osteoclast formation was assessed via TRAP staining and measurement 
of osteoclast-specific mRNA levels.
RESULTS: In the CIA model, AEBS decreased the incidence of arthritis, 
histological inflammation, cartilage scores, and oxidative stress. AEBS reduced 
the levels of proinflammatory cytokines in affected joints of CIA mice and 
suppressed NF-κB signaling. AEBS decreased Th17 cell numbers in spleen of CIA 
mice. Additionally, AEBS repressed differentiation of Th17 cells and expression 
of Th17-associated genes in vitro, in both splenocytes of naïve DBA/1J mice and 
human PBMCs. In vitro, the numbers of both human and mouse tartrate-resistant 
acid phosphatase+ (TRAP) multinucleated cells fell, in a dose-dependent manner, 
upon addition of AEBS.
CONCLUSIONS: The anti-arthritic effects of AEBS were associated with decreases 
in Th17 cell numbers, and the levels of proinflammatory cytokines synthesized by 
such cells, mediated via suppression of NF-κB signaling. Additionally, AEBS 
suppressed osteoclastogenesis and reduced oxidative stress levels.
