ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Gnaphalium affine D. Don (GA) has been 
traditionally used as a medicinal herb in China for the treatment of many 
ailments including rheumatoid arthritis. However, the anti-arthritic mechanism 
of GA has still not been demonstrated. This study aims to reveal the 
anti-inflammatory activity and anti-arthritic mechanism of ethanol extract of G. 
affine D. Don.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Anti-inflammatory potential of GA was analyzed in vivo in 
carrageenan induced mice paw edema (acute study). Also, in vivo study was 
applied in collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) rats. In vitro experiments for 
analyzing the anti-inflammatory potential of GA were performed on rat alveolar 
macrophages cell line (NR8383). Analysis of nitric oxide release in NR8383 cells 
was done by Griess reaction. RT-PCR and western blotting experiment was 
performed to analyze the expression of phosphorylated p65 and IκBα/β-actin in 
NF-κB pathway. The production of TNF-α, IL-1β, and COX-2 in NR8383 cells were 
measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. The chemical profile of GA was 
analyzed by HPLC-VWD.
RESULTS: GA significantly reduced the paw volume in carrageenan induced rat paw 
edema rat at different doses (300 and 600 mg/kg), compared with the standard 
indomethacin treatment. In CIA, GA can obviously ameliorate the inflammatory 
symptom, including cytokine, histological symptom and paw swelling. In the vitro 
study, GA was able to reduce the nitric oxide (NO) levels in NR8383 cells that 
had been stimulated with lipopolysaccharide (LPS). The level of TNF-α, IL-1β, 
and COX-2 was also decreased with GA treatment in NR8383 cells that had been 
stimulated with lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Interestingly, GA was found to 
decrease the level of phosphorylated p65 and IκBα in NR8383 cells. Fifteen 
compounds were identified by HPLC-VWD with the reference substances and verified 
by LC-MS.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of the experiment scientifically validated its 
traditional use in inflammatory conditions.
