Cardiovascular disease is the leading cause of death in Western cultures. The 
vast majority of cardiovascular events, including stroke and myocardial 
infarction, result from the rupture of vulnerable atherosclerotic plaques, which 
are characterized by high and active macrophage content. Current imaging 
modalities including magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) aim to characterize 
anatomic and structural features of plaques rather than their content. 
Previously, we reported that macrophage-targeted delivery of gadolinium 
(Gd)-based contrast agent (GBCA-HDL) using high density lipoproteins (HDL)-like 
particles significantly enhances the detection of plaques in an apolipoprotein 
(apo) E knockout (KO) mouse model, with an atherosclerotic wall/muscle 
normalized enhancement ratio (NER) of 120% achieved. These particles are 
comprised of lipids and synthetic peptide fragments of the major protein of HDL, 
apo A-I, that contain a naturally occurring modification which targets the 
particles to macrophages. Targeted delivery minimizes the Gd dose and thus 
reduces the adverse effects of Gd. The aims of the current study were to test 
whether varying the GBCA-HDL particle shape and composition can further enhance 
atherosclerotic plaque MRI and control organ clearance of these agents. We show 
that the optimized GBCA-HDL particles are efficiently delivered intracellularly 
to and uptaken by both J774 macrophages in vitro and more importantly, by 
intraplaque macrophages in vivo, as evidenced by NER up to 160% and higher. This 
suggests high diagnostic power of our GBCA-HDL particles in the detection of 
vulnerable atherosclerotic plaques. Further, in contrast to discoidal, spherical 
GBCA-HDL exhibit hepatic clearance, which could further diminish adverse renal 
effects of Gd. Finally, activated macrophages are reliable indicators of any 
inflamed tissues and are implicated in other areas of unmet clinical need such 
as rheumatoid arthritis, sepsis and cancer, suggesting the expanded diagnostic 
and prognostic use of this method.
