OBJECTIVE: Up-regulation of glucose metabolism has been implicated not only in 
tumor cell growth but also in immune cells upon activation. However, little is 
known about the metabolite profile in rheumatoid arthritis (RA), particularly in 
fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS). This study was undertaken to evaluate 
whether changes in glucose metabolism in RA FLS could play a role in 
inflammation and joint damage.
METHODS: Synovium and FLS were obtained from patients with RA and patients with 
osteoarthritis (OA). The rate of glycolysis after stimulation of FLS with 
lipopolysaccharide and platelet-derived growth factor BB was measured using 
glycolysis stress test technology. FLS function was evaluated using a glycolysis 
inhibitor, 2-deoxy-d-glucose (2-DG). After stimulation of the FLS, a migration 
scratch assay, MTT assay, and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay were performed 
to measure the effect of 2-DG on FLS migration, viability of the FLS, and 
cytokine secretion, respectively. IRDye 800CW 2-DG was used to assess glucose 
uptake in the arthritic joints and stromal cells of mice after K/BxN mouse serum 
transfer. The mice were injected daily, intraperitoneally, with 3-bromopyruvate 
(BrPa; 5 mg/kg) to assess the effect of inhibition of glycolysis in vivo.
RESULTS: Compared to human OA FLS, the balance between glycolysis and oxidative 
phosphorylation was shifted toward glycolysis in RA FLS. Glucose transporter 1 
(GLUT1) messenger RNA (mRNA) expression correlated with baseline functions of 
the RA FLS. Glucose deprivation or incubation of the FLS with glycolytic 
inhibitors impaired cytokine secretion and decreased the rate of proliferation 
and migration of the cells. In a mouse model of inflammatory arthritis, GLUT1 
mRNA expression in the synovial lining cells was observed, and increased levels 
of glucose uptake and glycolytic gene expression were detected in the stromal 
compartment of the arthritic mouse joints. Inhibition of glycolysis by BrPa, 
administered in vivo, significantly decreased the severity of arthritis in this 
mouse model.
CONCLUSION: Targeting metabolic pathways is a novel approach to understanding 
the mechanisms of disease. Inhibition of glycolysis may directly modulate 
synoviocyte-mediated inflammatory functions and could be an effective treatment 
strategy for arthritis.
