BACKGROUND: Methotrexate (MTX) is one of the most widely used medications to 
treat rheumatoid arthritis (RA), and recent studies have also suggested the 
potential benefit of the drug for the treatment of osteoarthritis (OA) of the 
knee. MTX is commonly administered in oral formulations, but is often associated 
with systemic adverse reactions. In an attempt to address this issue, we have 
shown previously that a conjugate of hyaluronic acid (HA) and MTX exhibits 
potential as a drug candidate for intra-articular treatment of inflammatory 
arthritis. In this study, we compare the efficacy and safety of an optimized 
HA-MTX conjugate, DK226, with that of MTX in inflammatory arthritis rat models.
METHODS: In vitro activity of DK226 was assessed in human fibroblast-like 
synoviocytes (HFLS) and a synovial sarcoma cell line, SW982. Release of MTX from 
DK226 was investigated after incubation with rabbit synovial tissue homogenate 
or synovial fluid. In vivo efficacy of DK226 was evaluated in antigen-induced 
arthritis (AIA) and collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) in the rat knee. 
Pharmacokinetics and hematological toxicity after treatment with oral MTX or an 
intra-articular injection of DK226 were compared in AIA.
RESULTS: Proliferation of HFLS and SW982 cells was inhibited by DK226, and the 
inhibitory activity was reversed by cotreatment with excess HA or anti-CD44 
antibody. MTX was released from DK226 by incubation with rabbit synovial tissue 
homogenate or synovial fluid at pH 4.0, but not at pH 7.4. AIA was ameliorated 
by intra-articular DK226, but not by HA, as potently as oral MTX. Hematological 
toxicity was induced by oral MTX, but not by DK226. The maximum plasma 
concentration of MTX after oral MTX was 40 times higher than the concentration 
of MTX after an intra-articular injection of DK226. Knee swelling in AIA was 
inhibited by intra-articular injections of DK226, but not by free MTX or a 
mixture of HA and MTX. In CIA, an injection of DK226 into the right knee joint 
significantly reduced swelling and synovial inflammation of the treated knee 
joint, but had no effect on the untreated contralateral knee joint.
CONCLUSIONS: DK226 exerted anti-arthritic effects in two different models of 
arthritis. The conjugate had a wider therapeutic window than oral MTX, and could 
be a future drug for treatment of arthritic disorders, including inflammatory 
OA.
