OBJECTIVES: To determine the effect of etanercept on endothelial dysfunction and 
on traditional cardiovascular (CV) risk factors in the adjuvant-induced 
arthritis (AIA) rat model.
METHODS: At the first signs of arthritis, etanercept (10 mg/kg/3 days, s.c.) or 
saline was administered for 3 weeks in AIA rats. Body weights and arthritis 
scores were monitored daily. Endothelial function was studied in aortic rings 
relaxed with acetylcholine (Ach) with or without inhibitors of nitric oxide 
synthase (NOS), cyclo-oxygenase (COX-2), arginase, endothelium-derived 
hyperpolarizing factor and superoxide anions (O2 (-)°) production. Aortic 
expression of endothelial nitic oxide synthase (eNOS), Ser1177-phospho-eNOS, 
COX-2, arginase-2, p22(phox) and p47(phox) was evaluated by western blotting 
analysis. Blood pressure, heart rate and blood levels of triglycerides, 
cholesterol and glucose were measured.
RESULTS: Etanercept significantly reduced arthritis score (P < 0.001). It 
improved Ach-induced relaxation (P < 0.05) as a result of increased NOS 
activity, decreased COX-2/arginase activities and decreased O2 (-)° production. 
These functional effects relied on increased eNOS expression and 
phosphorylation, and decreased COX-2, arginase-2 and p22(phox) expressions. No 
correlation was found between arthritis score and Ach-induced relaxation. The 
treatment did not change triglycerides, cholesterol and glucose levels, but 
significantly increased systolic blood pressure and heart rate (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Our data demonstrated that efficient dosage of etanercept on 
inflammatory symptoms improved endothelial function in AIA. This beneficial 
effect on endothelial function is disconnected from its impact on CV risk 
factors and relates to pleiotropic effects of etanercept on endothelial 
pathways. These results suggest that etanercept could be a good choice for 
patients with rheumatoid arthritis at high risk of CV events.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the British 
Society for Rheumatology. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.
