The effect of vitamin D3 in oral solution (VD3 ) and vitamin D3 -loaded 
nanocapsules (NC-VD3 ) was analysed in animals with complete Freund's adjuvant 
(CFA) induced arthritis (AR). For this purpose, we evaluated scores for 
arthritis, thermal hyperalgesia and paw oedema, as well as histological analyses 
and measurements of the activity of the ectonucleoside triphosphate 
diphosphohydrolase (E-NTPDase) and ecto-adenosine deaminase (E-ADA) enzymes in 
rat lymphocytes. Haematological and biochemical parameters were also determined. 
The doses administered were 120 UI/day of VD3 and 15.84 UI/day of NC-VD3 . 
Fifteen days after the induction of AR, the groups were treated for 15 days with 
vitamin D3 . The results demonstrated that VD3 was able to reduce arthritis 
scores, thermal hyperalgesia and paw oedema in rats with CFA-induced arthritis. 
However, treatment with NC-VD3 did not reduce arthritis scores. The histological 
analyses showed that both formulations were able to reduce the inflammatory 
changes induced by CFA. The activity of E-NTPDase in rat lymphocytes was higher 
in the AR compared with the control group, while the activity of E-ADA was 
lower. This effect was reversed after the 15-day treatment. Data from this study 
indicates that both forms of vitamin D3 seem to contribute to decreasing the 
inflammatory process induced by CFA, possibly altering the activities of 
ectoenzymes. Copyright © 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
SIGNIFICANCE OF THE STUDY: The effects promoted by both formulations of vitamin 
D3 , either in oral solution or nanoencapsulated form, strongly suggests the 
softening of the inflammatory process induced by complete Freund's adjuvant 
(CFA), possibly altering the E-NTPDase and E-ADA activities. However, it is 
known that vitamin D has a beneficial effect on the modulation of the immune 
system components responsible for the inflammatory process. Moreover, the 
establishment of responses to treatment with vitamin D3 may provide an 
alternative for inhibiting the proinflammatory response, assisting in our 
understanding of the immunopathology of this disease and possibly improving the 
signs and symptoms that hinder the quality of life of patients with rheumatoid 
arthritis.
HIGHLIGHTS: Evaluation of the effects on the E-NTPDase and E-ADA activities in 
an animal model of induced arthritis. Two formulations of vitamin D3 were used: 
form oral solution and nanoencapsulated. Vitamin D3 seems to contribute to the 
inflammatory process induced by CFA. Vitamin D3 possibly alters the E-NTPDase 
and E-ADA activities. Vitamin D3 may be an alternative supplementary treatment 
for chronic arthritis.
