Increased osteoclastogenesis is responsible for osteolysis, which is a severe 
consequence of inflammatory diseases associated with bone destruction, such as 
rheumatoid arthritis and periodontitis. The mechanisms that limit 
osteoclastogenesis under inflammatory conditions are largely unknown. We 
previously identified transcription factor RBP-J as a key negative regulator 
that restrains TNF-α-induced osteoclastogenesis and inflammatory bone 
resorption. In this study, we tested whether RBP-J suppresses inflammatory 
osteoclastogenesis by regulating the expression of microRNAs (miRNAs) important 
for this process. Using high-throughput sequencing of miRNAs, we obtained the 
first, to our knowledge, genome-wide profile of miRNA expression induced by 
TNF-α in mouse bone marrow-derived macrophages/osteoclast precursors during 
inflammatory osteoclastogenesis. Furthermore, we identified miR-182 as a novel 
miRNA that promotes inflammatory osteoclastogenesis driven by TNF-α and whose 
expression is suppressed by RBP-J. Downregulation of miR-182 dramatically 
suppressed the enhanced osteoclastogenesis program induced by TNF-α in 
RBP-J-deficient cells. Complementary loss- and gain-of-function approaches 
showed that miR-182 is a positive regulator of osteoclastogenic transcription 
factors NFATc1 and B lymphocyte-induced maturation protein-1. Moreover, we 
identified that direct miR-182 targets, Foxo3 and Maml1, play important 
inhibitory roles in TNF-α-mediated osteoclastogenesis. Thus, RBP-J-regulated 
miR-182 promotes TNF-α-induced osteoclastogenesis via inhibition of Foxo3 and 
Maml1. Suppression of miR-182 by RBP-J serves as an important mechanism that 
restrains TNF-α-induced osteoclastogenesis. Our results provide a novel 
miRNA-mediated mechanism by which RBP-J inhibits osteoclastogenesis and suggest 
that targeting of the newly described RBP-J-miR-182-Foxo3/Maml1 axis may 
represent an effective therapeutic approach to suppress inflammatory 
osteoclastogenesis and bone resorption.
