Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is an X-linked muscle disease caused by 
mutations in the dystrophin gene. The pathology of DMD manifests in patients 
with progressive muscle weakness, loss of ambulation and ultimately death. One 
of the characteristics of DMD is muscle inflammation, and dystrophin-deficient 
skeletal muscles produce higher levels of the pro-inflammatory cytokine 
interleukin 1β (IL-1β) in response to toll like receptor (TLR) stimulation 
compared to controls; therefore, blocking the IL-1β pathway could improve the 
disease phenotype in mdx mice, a mouse model of DMD. Kineret® or IL-1Ra is a 
recombinant IL-1 receptor antagonist approved by the FDA for treating rheumatoid 
arthritis. To determine the efficacy of IL-1Ra in a DMD model, we administered 
subcutaneous injections of saline control or IL-1Ra (25 mg/kg/day) to mdx mice 
daily for 45 days beginning at 5 weeks of age. Functional and histological 
parameters were measured at the conclusion of the study. IL-1Ra only partially 
inhibited this signaling pathway in this study; however, there were still 
interesting observations to be noted. For example, although not significantly 
changed, splenocytes from the IL-1Ra-treated group secreted less IL-1β after LPS 
stimulation compared to control mice indicating a blunted response and 
incomplete inhibition of the pathway (37% decrease). In addition, normalized 
forelimb grip strength was significantly increased in IL-1Ra-treated mice. There 
were no changes in EDL muscle-specific force measurements, histological 
parameters, or motor coordination assessments in the dystrophic mice after 
IL-1Ra treatment. There was a significant 27% decrease in the movement time and 
total distance traveled by the IL-1Ra treated mice, correlating with previous 
studies examining effects of IL-1 on behavior. Our studies indicate partial 
blocking of IL-1β with IL-1Ra significantly altered only a few behavioral and 
strength related disease parameters; however, treatment with inhibitors that 
completely block IL-1β, pathways upstream of IL-1β production or combining 
various inhibitors may produce more favorable outcomes.
