The anti-inflammatory activities of benzothiazine and pyrazole derivatives are 
well documented. A series of novel 
N'-arylmethylidene-2-(3,4-dimethyl-5,5-dioxidopyrazolo(4,3 c)(1,2) 
benzothiazin-2(4H)yl) acetohydrazide compounds were previously synthesized by 
combining benzothiazine and pyrazole moieties into a single nucleus. The current 
study investigates the anti-arthritic potential of 3-ethoxy-4-hydroxyphenyl 
derivative (EHP) and its possible mechanism in arthritic rat model. 
Sprague-Dawley rats were induced rheumatoid arthritis with Freund's complete 
adjuvant and treated with EHP and piroxicam. At the end of the study, arthritic 
score was calculated, and ankle joint histopathology was performed using 
hematoxylin and eosin staining. Real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain 
reaction (qRT-PCR) and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) were used to 
determine mRNA expression and protein levels of various inflammatory markers, 
respectively. In vitro concanavalin A (ConA)-stimulated splenocyte proliferation 
was measured. Serum levels of C-reactive protein (CRP), urea, creatinine, 
aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine transaminase (ALT), and alkaline 
phosphatase (ALP) were also determined. EHP significantly attenuated macroscopic 
arthritic score, joint histopathological lesions, and CRP levels. Treatment with 
EHP significantly reduced pro-inflammatory tissue necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), 
nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-кB), interleukin-17 (IL-17), and prostaglandin-E2 
(PGE2) levels and increased the levels of anti-inflammatory interleukin-4 (IL-4) 
and interleukin-10 (IL-10). ConA-stimulated splenocyte proliferation was also 
significantly suppressed by treatment with EHP. Normalizing all hematological 
markers and ALP levels, EHP did not display any sign of nephrotoxicity and 
hepatotoxicity as determined by urea, creatinine, ALT, and AST levels. In 
conclusion, EHP possesses significant anti-arthritic property which may be 
attributed to its anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory effects.
