ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Saussurea involucrate (Kar. et Kir.) Sch. -Bip 
is an endangered species of the Compositae family, and this species has long 
been used for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, dysmenorrhea, stomachache, 
and altitude sickness in Uighur folk and Chinese medicine.
AIM OF THE STUDY: This study aimed to investigate the different therapeutic 
efficacy of alcohol infusion (SEI) and water decoction (SWD) of S. involucrata 
in treating rheumatoid arthritis using complete Freund's adjuvant (CFA)-induced 
arthritis (AA) in a rat model.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Male Wistar rats (160-180g) were immunized by intradermal 
injection of 0.1mL of CFA into the left hind metatarsal footpad. Aspirin was 
chosen as the positive drug. Alcohol infusion (SEI, 400 and 800mg/kg) and water 
decoction (SWD, 443 and 886mg/kg) of S. involucrata aerial parts were orally 
administered from day 1 and continued for 21 days. Arthritis severity was 
evaluated by arthritic score, body weight loss, and paw swelling. The levels of 
TNF-α, IL-β, and IL-6 in the serum of AA rats were detected by enzyme linked 
immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Histological changes in the ankle joint were also 
analyzed in the AA rats.
RESULTS: Both SEI and SWD significantly ameliorated AA severity, as suggested by 
the modulatory effects on body weight loss, paw swelling, and arthritic score. 
Histopathological improvement in the joint architecture was also observed in the 
SEI- and SWD-treated AA rats. The overproduction of TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-6 was 
remarkably attenuated in the serum of all treated rats. Furthermore, the 
therapeutic effect of SWD was more potent than that of SEI in treating 
rheumatoid arthritis using AA in a rat model, which was reported for the first 
time.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggested that the extract of S. involucrata 
significantly attenuated adjuvant arthritis in rats by decreasing the levels of 
TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-6 in the serum. S. involucrata has the potential to be 
regarded as a candidate for the treatment of human arthritis. Moreover, the 
therapeutic effect of SWD was much better than alcohol infusion, indicting that 
active constituents are mainly in the water extract, which is helpful for the 
clinical treatments to choose the appropriate process.
