The aim of the present study was to investigate the anti-rheumatoid activity of 
secondary metabolites produced by endophytic mycobiota in Egypt. A total of 27 
endophytic fungi were isolated from 10 dominant medicinal plant host species in 
Wadi Tala, Saint Katherine Protectorate, arid Sinai, Egypt. Of those taxa, seven 
isolates of Chaetomium globosum (CG1-CG7), being the most frequent taxon, were 
recovered from seven different host plants and screened for production of active 
anti-inflammatory metabolites. Isolates were cultivated on half - strength 
potato dextrose broth for 21 days at 28°C on a rotatory shaker at 180 rpm, and 
extracted in ethyl acetate and methanol, respectively. The probable inhibitory 
effects of both extracts against an adjuvant induced arthritis (AIA) rat model 
were examined and compared with the effects of methotrexate (MTX) as a standard 
disease-modifying anti-rheumatoid drug. Disease activity and mobility scoring of 
AIA, histopathology and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) were used to 
evaluate probable inhibitory roles. A significant reduction (P < 0.05) in the 
severity of arthritis was observed in both the methanolic extract of CG6 (MCG6) 
and MTX treatment groups 6 days after treatment commenced. The average arthritis 
score of the MCG6 treatment group was (10.7 ± 0.82) compared to (13.8 ± 0.98) in 
the positive control group. The mobility score of the MCG6 treatment group (1.50 
± 0.55) was significantly lower than that of the positive control group (3.33 ± 
0.82). In contrast, the ethyl acetate extract of CG6 (EACG6) treatment group 
showed no improvements in arthritis and mobility scores in AIA model rats. 
Histopathology and TEM findings confirmed the observation. Isolate CG6 was 
subjected to sequencing for confirmation of phenotypic identification. The 
internal transcribed spacer (ITS) 1-5.8 s - ITS2 rDNA sequences obtained were 
compared with those deposited in the GenBank Database and registered with 
accession number KC811080 in the NCBI Database. The present study revealed that 
the methanol extract of endophytic fungus C. globosum (KC811080) recovered from 
maidenhair fern has an inhibitory effect on inflammation, histopathology and 
morphological features of rheumatoid arthritis in an AIA rat model.
