ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Eucommia ulmoides Oliv., a valuable Chinese 
herb, has shown a variety of health benefits. Despite the widespread clinical 
use of this herb to treat rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in Traditional Chinese 
Medicine (TCM), very few studies have described its anti-pathological effects or 
mechanism in RA. The present study investigated the mechanism of Eucommia 
ulmoides Oliv. in an experimental collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) rat model.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The effects of four different Eucommia ulmoides Oliv. 
extracts on the proliferation of rheumatoid arthritis fibroblast-like 
synoviocytes (RA-FLS) were screened in an MTT assay, and apoptotic effects were 
detected by flow cytometry. Among the extracts, the 70% ethanol extract (EU70) 
presented the best inhibition and was further investigated for its curative 
effect in CIA rats. Foot swelling was detected, and the arthritis index (AI) was 
scored. Pathological improvement was assessed by haematoxylin and eosin (H&E) 
staining of joint tissues. The mechanistic effects of EU70 were investigated as 
follows: anti-inflammatory effects in Th17-positive cells by flow cytometry; 
serum levels of inflammatory cytokines by ELISA; TNFα and IL-1β expression by 
immunohistochemistry (IHC); and anti-osteoclastogenesis by QPCR detection of 
RANKL and OPG mRNA.
RESULTS: Compared with vehicle treatment in CIA model rats, EU70 significantly 
ameliorated foot swelling, decreased AI in vivo and reduced inflammatory cell 
infiltration and synoviocyte proliferation. EU70 decreased the number of 
Th17-positive cells in the spleen and the serum levels of cytokines, including 
IL-17, IL-1β and TNFα, and upregulated the serum levels of IL-10; these results 
indicated the anti-inflammatory effect of EU70. Moreover, EU70 effectively 
suppressed TNFα and IL-1β expression in the joint tissues and resulted in the 
downregulation of RANKL mRNA and the upregulation of OPG mRNA. These results 
revealed the possible preventive role of EU70 against bone destruction.
CONCLUSION: For the first time, these mechanisms and pathological improvements 
support the clinical use of Eucommia ulmoides Oliv. in treating RA. The findings 
indicated that the 70% ethanol extract of Eucommia ulmoides Oliv. could relieve 
RA symptoms by (1) suppressing the proliferation of synoviocytes, (2) reducing 
the number of Th17-positive cells and downregulating serum IL-17 expression, (3) 
increasing the anti-inflammatory effects of IL-10, (4) inhibiting the serum and 
tissue levels of key pro-inflammatory cytokines, TNFα and IL-1β, and (5) 
reducing the degradation of cartilage and bone.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.. All rights 
reserved.
