OBJECTIVE: Therapeutic agents that are transformable via introducing cleavable 
linkage by locally enriched MMP-2 within inflamed synovium would enhance 
therapeutic efficacy on chronic inflammatory arthritis. Transforming growth 
factor-β-inducible gene-h3 (βig-h3), which consists of four fas-1 domains and an 
Arg-Gly-Asp (RGD) motif, intensifies inflammatory processes by facilitating 
adhesion and migration of fibroblast-like synoviocyte in the pathogenesis of 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA). The aim of this study was to investigate whether a 
MMP-2-cleavable peptide complex consisting of a fas-1 domain and an RGD peptide 
blocks the interaction between βig-h3 and resident cells and leads to the 
amelioration of inflammatory arthritis.
METHODS: We designed βig-h3-derivatives, including the fourth fas-1 domain 
truncated for H1 and H2 sequences of mouse (MFK00) and MMP-2-cleavable peptide 
complex (MFK902). MMP-2 selectivity was examined by treatment with a series of 
proteases. MFK902 efficacy was determined by the adhesion and migration assay 
with NIH3T3 cells in vitro and collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) model using male 
DBA/1J mice in vivo. The mice were treated intraperitoneally with MFK902 at 
different dosages.
RESULTS: MFK902 was specifically cleaved by active MMP-2 in a 
concentration-dependent manner, and βig-h3-mediated adhesion and migration were 
more effectively inhibited by MFK902, compared with RGD or MFK00 peptides. The 
arthritis activity of murine CIA, measured by clinical arthritis index and 
incidence of arthritic paws, was significantly ameliorated after treatment with 
all dosages of MFK902 (1, 10, and 30 mg/kg). MFK902 ameliorated histopathologic 
deterioration and reduced the expression of inflammatory mediators 
simultaneously with improvement of clinical features. In addition, a favorable 
safety profile of MFK902 was demonstrated in vivo.
CONCLUSION: The present study revealed that MMP-2-cleavable peptide complex 
based on βig-h3 structure is a potent and safe therapeutic agent for chronic 
inflammatory arthritis, thus providing reliable evidence for a MMP-2-cleavable 
mechanism as a tissue-targeted strategy for treatment of RA.
