The induction of apoptosis-resistant rheumatoid synovial tissue cells has been 
related to constitutively active Janus kinase/signal transducers and activators 
of transcription (JAK/STAT) signaling in rheumatoid arthritis (RA). The 
excessive proliferation and inherent resistance to apoptosis of fibroblast-like 
synoviocytes (FLS) is an important mechanism by which RA originates. However, 
the effects of matrine on FLS in RA is unclear. The present study aimed to 
investigate the mechanism of action of matrine in a rat model of 
collagen‑induced arthritis (CIA). The CIA model was established using bovine 
type II collagen. FLS were isolated from control and CIA rats, cultured 
in vitro, and confirmed to harbor fibroblast‑like characteristics. After 
treatment of FLS with varying conc-entrations of matrine, the JAK2 inhibitor 
AG490, or a combination of both drugs, cell proliferation, apoptosis rate, 
expression of apoptotic markers and the activation of the JAK/STAT pathway were 
assessed. Additionally, CIA rats were administered either matrine or 
methotrexate by oral gavage to examine the effects of therapeutic intervention 
on arthritis pathogenesis. The arthritis index (AI) was measured and ankle joint 
structure was analyzed histologically to determine the severity of CIA. 
Furthermore, expression levels of apoptotic markers and members of the 
JAK/STAT family were also examined in vivo. Compared with the CIA group, matrine 
reduced AI and improved ankle pathology. Matrine also inhibited FLS 
proliferation, induced G0/G1 cell cycle arrest, and increased the rate of 
apoptosis in vitro. The effects of matrine on apoptosis induction were further 
confirmed by observations that Bcl-2 levels were decreased, whereas Bax and 
caspase-3 levels were increased in the matrine-treated synovial tissues and FLS. 
Finally, matrine treatment also diminished the phosphorylation, and hence 
activation of JAK2, STAT1 and STAT3. Our results suggest that matrine induces 
the apoptosis of FLS from rats with CIA by inhibiting activation of the JAK/STAT 
signaling pathway.
