BACKGROUND: Xian-Fang-Huo-Ming-Yin (XFHM), a traditional herbal formula, has 
been used to treat sores and carbuncles for hundreds of years in Asia. Nowadays, 
its clinical effects in treatment of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) have been 
validated. In this study, we want to study its possible molecular mechanisms of 
regulating the differentiation of lymphocytes and production of pro-inflammatory 
cytokines in collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) mice for RA treatment.
METHODS: A high performance liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization/mass 
spectrometer (HPLC-ESI/MSn) system was used to analyze the constituents of XFHM 
granules. An arthritics mouse model was induced by collagen and leflunomide 
(LEF) was used as a positive control medicine. Pathological changes at the 
metatarsophalangeal joint were studied through Safranin O and 
immunohistochemical staining. The differentiation of T, B and NK cells was 
examined by flow cytometry and pro-inflammatory cytokines were assayed using an 
Inflammation Antibody Array assay. The expression of key molecules of the 
nuclear factor κB (NF-κB) and Janus kinase/signal transducers and activators of 
transcription (JAK/STAT) signaling pathways in spleen were studied by 
western-blot analysis.
RESULTS: In our study. 21 different dominant chemical constituents were 
identified in XFHM. Treatment with XFHM suppressed the pathological changes in 
arthrosis of CIA. Additionally, XFHM down-regulated the proliferation and 
differentiation of CD3+ T cells and CD3-CD19+ B cells significantly. However, 
XFHM had no significant effect on CD3-NK1.1+ NK cells. Further study showed that 
the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines had been suppressed by inhibiting 
the activation of NF-κB and JAK/STAT signaling.
CONCLUSIONS: XFHM can regulate and maintain the immunologic balance of 
lymphocytic immunity and inhibit the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines, 
thus suppressing the pathological changes of RA. Therefore, XFHM may be used as 
an application of traditional medicine against RA in modern complementary and 
alternative therapeutics.
