BACKGROUND: Patients with temporomandibular joint disorders (TMD), reactive 
arthritis and rheumatoid arthritis often have combined etiology of hereditary 
and microenvironmental factors contributing to joint pain. Multiple clinical and 
animal studies indicate 'double-hit' inflammatory insults can cause chronic 
inflammation. The first inflammatory insult primes the immune system and 
subsequent insults elicit amplified responses. The present 'double hit' study 
produced a chronic orofacial pain model in mice with genetic deletion of both 
TNFα receptors (TNFR1/R2-/-), investigating the main nociceptive signalling 
pathways in comparisons to wild type mice.
METHODS: An initial inflammatory insult was given unilaterally into the 
temporomandibular joint (TMJ). Secondary hypersensitivity was tested on the skin 
over the TMJ throughout the experiment. Three weeks later after complete 
reversal of hypersensitivity, a second inflammatory insult was imposed on the 
colon. Pharmacological interventions were tested for efficacy after week 10 when 
hypersensitivity was chronic in TNFR1/R2-/- mice. Serum cytokines were analysed 
at Days 1, 14, and Week 18.
RESULTS: The double hit insult produced chronic hypersensitivity continuing 
through the 4-month experimental timeline in the absence of TNFα signalling. 
P2X7 and NMDA receptor antagonists temporarily attenuated chronic 
hypersensitivity. Serum cytokine/chemokine analysis on Day 14 when CFA induced 
hypersensitivity was resolved identified increased levels of pro-inflammatory 
cytokines CCL2, CXCL9, CXCL10, RANTES and decreased levels of anti-inflammatory 
cytokines IL-1ra and IL-4 in TNFR1/R2-/- compared to WT mice.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest a causal feed-forward signalling cascade of 
these little studied cytokines have the potential to cause recrudescence in this 
orofacial inflammatory pain model in the absence of TNFα signalling.
SIGNIFICANCE: Using a mouse model of chronic inflammatory temporomandibular 
joint disorder, we determined that absence of functional TNFR1/R2 induces 
aberrant inflammatory signalling caused by other increased pro-inflammatory and 
decreased anti-inflammatory cytokines that could serve as blood biomarkers and 
may predict disease progression.
