The study aimed to investigate the relationship between tumor necrosis factor 
receptor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6) and a differentially mature dendritic cell 
(mDC) in collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) mice and to determine whether or not 
TRAF6 regulates the activation of an immature dendritic cell (iDC) and inhibits 
iDC maturation to induce immune tolerance. The mouse bone marrow stem cells were 
induced with recombinant granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor 
(rmGM-CSF) and recombinant interleukin-4 (rmIL-4) to differentiate immature 
dendritic cells (DCs), which were divided into four groups with different 
maturation states: rmGM-CSF, rmIL-4; TNF-α; LPS; and FK506 group. The levels of 
the cell surfaces of CD80, CD86, and MHI-II were analyzed by flow cytometry to 
prove DCs at different levels of maturity. The expression of IL-12 in DCs at 
different maturation states was detected by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
(ELISA). The expression of TRAF6 mRNA and protein in each group of DCs was 
detected by a reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and 
western blot analysis. The results revealed that the differentiation of bone 
marrow cells into iDCs was significantly induced by cytokines (rmGM-CSF, IL-4). 
CD80, CD86, MHC-II were expressed in the four groups, and the difference between 
them was statistically significant (P<0.05). A higher degree of DC 
differentiation led to a gradual increase of IL-12 secretion in the four groups. 
The difference was statistically significant (P<0.05) for this secretion (group 
D, 10,620.73±276.73 pg/ml). The expression levels of TRAF6 mRNA were 
significantly higher in group D than those in the other three groups (P<0.01). 
Although there was no significant difference in the expression levels of TRAF6 
mRNA between groups B and C, the expression levels of TRAF6 mRNA between groups 
B and C were higher than those of the control group. The TRAF6 protein 
expression was higher in group D than that in the other three groups (P<0.01), 
and the difference was statistically significant. There was a statistically 
significant difference in the TRAF6 protein expression between group A and 
groups B and C, but the expression in group C was higher than that in group B 
(P<0.01). In conclusion, the expression of co-stimulatory molecules gradually 
increased in the DCs of different maturation states, and the expression of 
IL-12, TRAF6 mRNA, and TRAF6 protein positively correlated with the degree of DC 
maturation. TRAF6 is important in iDC polarity and maturation.
