Deimination, a posttranslational modification of arginine to citrulline carried 
out by peptidylarginine deiminases, may compromise tolerance of self-antigens. 
Patients with connective tissue autoimmunity, particularly rheumatoid arthritis 
(RA), systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), or Felty's syndrome, present with 
autoantibodies to deiminated histones (dH), which thus form a category of 
antibodies to citrullinated protein antigens (ACPA). In general, ACPA are a 
sensitive diagnostic for RA and may form in response to the release of nuclear 
chromatin (DNA plus dH) from granulocytes, usually referred to as neutrophil 
extracellular traps. The aim of this study was to examine spontaneously 
autoimmune mice for autoantibodies and T cell responses to dH. We compared IgG 
binding to deiminated and non-deiminated histones (nH) by ELISA and Western 
blotting in spontaneously autoimmune strains of (NZB × NZW) F1 and NZM2410 
together with their derivative congenic strains, C57BL/6.Sle1 and 
C57BL/6.Sle1.Sle3, which display profound autoreactivity against nuclear 
self-antigens. The splenocyte proliferation against the two antigens was 
determined in the spontaneously autoimmune (NZB × NZW) F1 strain from which 
other autoimmune strains used in the study were derived. Immunizations with dH 
and nH were attempted in BALB/c mice to assess their splenocyte response. 
Splenocytes from BALB/c mice and from autoimmune mice at the time of conversion 
to autoimmunity proliferated strongly in response to dH, yet serum IgG from 
autoimmune (NZB × NZW) F1, NZM2410, and C57BL/6.Sle1.Sle3 mice displayed a 
remarkable bias against binding to dH. At the time of seroconversion, the 
antibodies already exhibited preference for nH, and only nH were recovered from 
circulating immune complexes. Analysis of histone deimination showed 
constitutive deimination in thymic extracts from C57BL/6 and 
C57BL/6.Sle1.Sle2.Sle3 triply congenic mice and in spleens of autoimmune triply 
congenic mice. Our study demonstrates that tolerance mechanisms against dH are 
intact in BALB/c and C57BL/6 mice and continue to be effective in mice with 
overt autoimmunity to nH. We conclude that, in contrast to human RA and SLE 
patients, where we frequently observe autoantibodies against dH, autoimmune mice 
maintain strong tolerance mechanisms to prevent the development of 
autoantibodies to dH.
