Increasing evidence has suggested that systemic inflammation along with local 
brain inflammation can play a significant role in Alzheimer's disease (AD) 
pathogenesis. Identifying key molecules that regulate the crosstalk between the 
immune and the CNS can provide potential therapeutic targets. TNF-α is a 
proinflammatory cytokine implicated in the pathogenesis of systemic inflammatory 
and neurodegenerative diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and AD. Recent 
studies have reported that anti-TNF-α therapy or RA itself can modulate AD 
pathology, although the underlying mechanism is unclear. To investigate the role 
of peripheral TNF-α as a mediator of RA in the pathogenesis of AD, we generated 
double-transgenic 5XFAD/Tg197 AD/TNF mice that develop amyloid deposits and 
inflammatory arthritis induced by human TNF-α (huTNF-α) expression. We found 
that 5XFAD/Tg197 mice display decreased amyloid deposition, compromised neuronal 
integrity, and robust brain inflammation characterized by extensive gliosis and 
elevated blood-derived immune cell populations, including phagocytic macrophages 
and microglia. To evaluate the contribution of peripheral huTNF-α in the 
observed brain phenotype, we treated 5XFAD/Tg197 mice systemically with 
infliximab, an anti-huTNF-α antibody that does not penetrate the blood-brain 
barrier and prevents arthritis. Peripheral inhibition of huTNF-α increases 
amyloid deposition, rescues neuronal impairment, and suppresses gliosis and 
recruitment of blood-derived immune cells, without affecting brain huTNF-α 
levels. Our data report, for the first time, a distinctive role for peripheral 
TNF-α in the modulation of the amyloid phenotype in mice by regulating 
blood-derived and local brain inflammatory cell populations involved in 
β-amyloid clearance.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT Mounting evidence supports the active 
involvement of systemic inflammation, in addition to local brain inflammation, 
in Alzheimer's disease (AD) progression. TNF-α is a pluripotent cytokine that 
has been independently involved in the pathogenesis of systemic inflammatory 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and AD. Here we first demonstrate that manipulation of 
peripheral TNF-α in the context of arthritis modulates the amyloid phenotype by 
regulating immune cell trafficking in the mouse brain. Our study suggests that 
additionally to its local actions in the AD brain, TNF-α can also indirectly 
modulate amyloid pathology as a regulator of peripheral inflammation. Our 
findings may have significant implications in the treatment of RA patients with 
anti-TNF-α drugs and in the potential use of TNF-targeted therapies for AD.
