ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Clematis chinensis Osbeck / Notopterygium 
incisum Ting ex H, T-Chang (CN) is a traditional Chinese herb couple with 
prominent efficacy. The herb couple has been commonly used for clinical 
treatment of arthralgia syndrome ("Bi Zheng" in Chinese) for centuries in China, 
including rheumatic arthritis, osteoarthritis and gout in modern medicine.
AIM OF THE STUDY: To evaluate the anti-arthritic effect of CN herb couple in a 
rat model of rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Rats were divided randomly into six groups with eight 
each. Adjuvant-induced arthritis (AIA) model was established by intradermal 
injection of complete Freund's adjuvant (CFA). Rats were treated orally with 
different dosages of CN (0.7g/kg, 2.1g/kg, 6.3g/kg) from day 16 till day 40. 
Ibuprofen (50.4mg/kg) served as a positive control. Spontaneous activity, body 
weight, paw swelling, and arthritis index (AI) were monitored throughout drug 
treatment. Then serum levels of tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α), interleukin-6 
(IL-6), and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) were determined by enzyme 
linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kits. In addition, histopathological 
examination and immunohistochemistry were used to assess the severity of 
arthritis.
RESULTS: Three dosage of CN significantly ameliorated symptoms of RA via 
increasing body weight as well as reducing paw swelling (at dose of 6.3g/kg, 
p<0.01) in AIA rats. An extremely significant reduction of AI (p<0.001) was also 
observed with treatment of CN (6.3g/kg) compared with model group. In parallel, 
treatment of CN significantly down-regulated levels of TNF-α, IL-6, and VEGF 
both in serum (p<0.01) and in joint synovial compared with model rats. And 
histopathology revealed noticeable reduction in synovial hyperplasia, cartilage 
damage, and inflammatory infiltration by CN treatment, especially at dose of 
6.3g/kg.
CONCLUSIONS: To conclude, all results suggest that CN possesses evident 
anti-arthritic effects in AIA rats.
