BACKGROUND: Increasing evidences indicate that an unbalance between tryptases 
and their endogenous inhibitors, leading to an increased proteolytic activity, 
is implicated in the pathophysiology of rheumatoid arthritis. The aim of the 
present study was to evaluate the impact of tryptase inhibition on experimental 
arthritis.
METHODS: Analysis of gene expression and regulation in the mouse knee joint was 
performed by RT-qPCR and in situ hybridization. Arthritis was induced in male 
C57BL/6 mice with mBSA/IL-1β. Tryptase was inhibited by two approaches: a 
lentivirus-mediated heterologous expression of the human endogenous tryptase 
inhibitor, sperm-associated antigen 11B isoform C (hSPAG11B/C), or a chronic 
treatment with the synthetic tryptase inhibitor APC366. Several inflammatory 
parameters were evaluated, such as oedema formation, histopathology, production 
of IL-1β, -6, -17A and CXCL1/KC, myeloperoxidase and tryptase-like activities.
RESULTS: Spag11c was constitutively expressed in chondrocytes and cells from the 
synovial membrane in mice, but its expression did not change 7 days after the 
induction of arthritis, while tryptase expression and activity were upregulated. 
The intra-articular transduction of animals with the lentivirus phSPAG11B/C or 
the treatment with APC366 inhibited the increase of tryptase-like activity, the 
late phase of oedema formation, the production of IL-6 and CXCL1/KC. In 
contrast, neutrophil infiltration, degeneration of hyaline cartilage and erosion 
of subchondral bone were not affected.
CONCLUSIONS: Tryptase inhibition was effective in inhibiting some inflammatory 
parameters associated to mBSA/IL-1β-induced arthritis, notably late phase oedema 
formation and IL-6 production, but not neutrophil infiltration and joint 
degeneration. These results suggest that the therapeutic application of tryptase 
inhibitors to rheumatoid arthritis would be restrained to palliative care, but 
not as disease-modifying drugs. Finally, this study highlighted lentivirus-based 
gene delivery as an instrumental tool to study the relevance of target genes in 
synovial joint physiology and disease.
