Anemone flaccida Fr. Schmidt (Ranunculaceae) (Di Wu in Chinese) is used to treat 
punch injuries and rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Our previous report has shown that 
crude triterpenoid saponins from Anemone flaccida exhibited anti-arthritic 
effects on type II collagen-induced arthritis in rats. Furthermore, anhuienoside 
C (AC), a saponin compound isolated from A. flaccida, was observed to suppress 
the nitric oxide production in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-treated macrophage RAW 
264.7 cells. In this study, we examined the effects of AC on the prevention and 
treatment of collagen-induced arthritis in a mouse model and evaluated the 
potential mechanisms involved. We observed that oral administration of AC 
significantly suppressed the paw swelling and arthritic score, decreased the 
body weight loss, and decreased the spleen index. Improvement in the disease 
severity was accompanied by the reduction of cluster of differentiation 68 
(CD68)-positive cells in the ankle joint and inhibition of the pro-inflammatory 
cytokine tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) in the synovium of the joint. 
Mechanistic studies indicated that AC exerted its anti-inflammatory activity by 
inhibiting the mRNA expression levels of inducible nitric oxide synthase, 
cyclooxygenase-2, TNF-α, interleukin (IL)-1β, and IL-6 and by suppressing the 
production of inflammatory cytokines such as TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-6 in 
LPS-treated RAW 264.7 cells. AC also blocked the LPS-induced activation of the 
extracellular signal-regulated kinase, c-Jun N-terminal kinase, and p38 
mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways. Additionally, the LPS-induced 
activation of nuclear factor kappa-B (NF-κB) was significantly suppressed by AC 
treatment, as indicated by down-regulation of TLR4 and inhibition of the nuclear 
translocation of NF-κB p65 and by activation and degradation of the inhibitor of 
kappa B. These findings indicated that AC has a great potential to be developed 
as a therapeutic agent for human RA.
