BACKGROUND: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a common autoimmune disease 
characterized by chronic inflammation of the joints, leading to bone erosion and 
joint dysfunction. Despite the recent successes of disease-modifying 
anti-rheumatic drugs (DMARDs), there is still clinical need for understanding 
the development and molecular etiology of RA. Wnts are developmental morphogens 
whose roles in adult pathology are poorly characterized. Wnt5a is a member of 
the non-canonical family of Wnts that modulates a wide range of cell processes, 
including differentiation, migration, and inflammation. Wnt5a has been 
implicated as a possible contributor to arthritis and it is upregulated in 
synovial fibroblasts from RA patients.
METHODS: We investigated the role of endogenous Wnt5a in RA. 
Tamoxifen-inducible, Wnt5a knockout (Wnt5a cKO) mice and littermate controls 
were monitored for arthritis development and joint pathology using the K/BxN 
serum transfer-induced arthritis (STIA) model. To explore a role of Wnt5a in 
osteoclast fusion, bone marrow-derived monocytes (BMDMs) were differentiated in 
vitro.
RESULTS: Wnt5a cKO mice were resistant to arthritis development compared to 
control littermates as assessed by ankle thickness and histologic measurements. 
Some parameters of inflammation were reduced in the Wnt5a cKO mice, including 
the extent of polymononuclear cell infiltration and extra-articular 
inflammation. Wnt5a cKO mice also exhibited less cartilage destruction and a 
reduction in osteoclast activity with concomitant reduction in 
tartrate-resistant acid phosph﻿atase (TRAP), cathepsin K (CTSK), macrophage 
colony-stimulating factor (MCSF), matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)2 and MMP9 in 
the arthritic joints. Treatment of BMDMs with Wnt5a enhanced osteoclast fusion 
and increased the expression of dendrocyte-expressed seven transmembrane protein 
(DCSTAMP) and MMP9, that are necessary for osteoclast formation and activity.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that Wnt5a modulates the development of 
arthritis by promoting inflammation and osteoclast fusion, and provide the first 
mouse genetic evidence of a role for endogenous Wnt5a in autoimmune disease.
