Bones are inflexible yet ever-changing metabolic organs, and bone homeostasis is 
maintained through two delicately regulated processes: bone construction and 
bone reabsorption. An imbalance in bone metabolism is linked to most orthopedic 
diseases, including osteoporosis and rheumatoid arthritis. Importantly, tumor 
necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) blocks osteoblast differentiation and stimulates 
osteoclast formation, resulting in delayed deposition of new bone and 
accelerated bone resorption, especially in rheumatoid arthritis patients with 
inflammatory conditions. Pilose antler peptide (PAP) isolated and purified from 
deer antlers has been shown to have beneficial effects on chronic inflammation. 
In the present study, we studied the impact of PAP on osteoblast differentiation 
and evaluated the regulatory mechanism, with particular emphasis on the effect 
of PAP on TNF-α-mediated NF-κB signaling. Mouse primary osteoblast cells were 
activated with bone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP-2) for osteoblast 
differentiation. A significant stimulatory effect of PAP in osteoblastogenesis 
was observed using ALP activity and Alizarin Red S staining assays. Meanwhile, 
PAP significantly rescued TNF-α-induced impairment of osteoblast formation as 
well as mineralization. Furthermore, we found a similar trend upon analyzing 
osteoblast-specific gene expression. PAP significantly rescued TNF-α-mediated 
decrease in expression of osteoblast-specific genes. A molecular mechanism assay 
indicated that PAP significantly inhibited TNF-α-mediated stimulation of NF-κB 
signaling activity, as well as nuclear translocation of its subunit p65. 
Moreover, over-expression of p65 reversed the stimulatory effects of PAP on 
osteoblast differentiation. Furthermore, we also identified that PAP dose 
dependently inhibit osteoclastogenesis, and this effect might be achieved via 
suppressing NF-κB activity. In summary, this study shows that PAP promotes 
osteoblast differentiation and blocks TNF-α-mediated suppression of 
osteoblastogenesis in vitro via the NF-κB/p65 pathway, as well as inhibits 
osteoclastsogenesis in vitro. Therefore, PAP, a novel drug with both 
antiresorptive and osteoanabolic activity, shows therapeutic potential as an 
alternative treatment for osteolytic diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis 
and osteoporosis.
