Platelet-rich plasma (PRP) is a multifunctional blood product containing highly 
concentrated platelets, and various cell growth factors which promote cell 
proliferation and differentiation. PRP exhibited benefits in injurious articular 
cartilage repair and the removal of inflammatory factors in clinical studies. 
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an autoimmune disease manifesting primarily as 
inflammatory arthritis, which is associated with notable morbidity in humans. In 
the present study, the therapeutic effects and primary mechanism of PRP on a 
type II collagen‑induced arthritis (CIA) mouse model was investigated. 
Inflammatory factors interleukin (IL)‑6, IL‑8, IL‑17, IL‑1β, tumor necrosis 
factor (TNF)‑α and interferon (IFN)‑γ were analyzed in PRP and PBS‑treated 
groups. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), platelet‑derived growth 
factor (PDGF), insulin‑like growth factor (IGF)‑1 and transforming growth factor 
(TGF)‑β expression in peripheral whole blood was additionally analyzed. The 
therapeutic efficacy of PRP for RA mice was evaluated using clinical arthritis 
scores. The results of the present study demonstrated that treatment with PRP 
alleviated arthritis, and reduced humoral and cellular immune responses, leading 
to beneficial effects on histological parameters as observed using joint tissue 
histological staining. CIA mice treated with PRP exhibited downregulated 
expression of IL‑6, IL‑8, IL‑17A, IL‑1β, TNF‑α, receptor activator for nuclear 
factor‑κB and IFN‑γ in inflammatory tissue. In addition, VEGF, PDGF, IGF‑1 and 
TGF‑β expression in peripheral whole blood was increased following treatment 
with PRP. The serum concentration of anti‑collagen antibody was decreased in 
PRP‑treated CIA mice. In conclusion, CIA mice treated with PRP exhibited 
beneficial effects, including decreased joint inflammation, cartilage 
destruction and bone damage, and increased repair of joint tissue. The results 
of the present study suggested that PRP may be an effective therapeutic agent 
for RA.
