BACKGROUND: The role of dopaminergic system in the development of rheumatoid 
arthritis-related pain, a major symptom in this disease, has not been explored. 
Therefore, the anti-nociceptive effect of mazindol, a dopamine uptake inhibitor, 
was evaluated in a model of complete Freund's adjuvant (CFA)-induced arthritis. 
Furthermore, as studies have shown that the dopaminergic system regulates bone 
metabolism, the effect of mazindol on bone mass and microarchitecture was 
determined.
METHODS: Adult ICR male mice received intra-articular injections of either CFA 
or saline into the right knee joint every week. Spontaneous pain-like behaviors 
(flinching and guarding) and locomotor activity were assessed at day 26 
post-first CFA, following which, a single intraperitoneally (i.p.) administered 
dose of mazindol was given (1, 3 and 10 mg/kg). Then, the antinociceptive effect 
of a repeated administration of 3 mg/kg mazindol (daily, i.p.; day 15-day 26) 
was evaluated. Additionally, at day 26, the participation of D1-like, D2-like or 
opioid receptors in the antinociceptive effect of mazindol was evaluated. The 
effect of mazindol on bone density and microarchitecture was evaluated by 
micro-computed tomography.
RESULTS: Acute administration of mazindol decreased the spontaneous pain-like 
behaviors in a dose-dependent manner without reducing the knee edema. However, 
mazindol at 10 mg/kg significantly increased the locomotor activity; therefore, 
3 mg/kg mazindol was used for further studies. Repeated administration of 3 
mg/kg mazindol significantly decreased the pain-like behaviors without modifying 
locomotor activity. The antinociceptive effect of mazindol was blocked by 
administration of a D2-like receptor antagonist (haloperidol), but not by 
administration of D1-like receptor antagonist (SCH 23390) or an opioid receptor 
antagonist (naloxone). Repeated administration of mazindol did not significantly 
modify the density and microarchitecture of periarticular bone of the arthritic 
and nonarthritic knee joints.
CONCLUSION: Results suggest that mazindol via D2-like receptors has an 
antinociceptive role in mice with CFA-induced knee arthritis without modifying 
the bone health negatively.
