Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) is a neurodegenerative disorder caused by prion 
protein (PrP) misfolding, clinically recognized by cognitive and motor deficits, 
electroencephalographic abnormalities, and seizures. Its neurophysiological 
bases are not known. To assess the potential involvement of NMDA receptor 
(NMDAR) dysfunction, we analyzed NMDA-dependent synaptic plasticity in 
hippocampal slices from Tg(CJD) mice, which model a genetic form of CJD. Because 
PrP depletion may result in functional upregulation of NMDARs, we also analyzed 
PrP knock-out (KO) mice. Long-term potentiation (LTP) at the Schaffer 
collateral-commissural synapses in the CA1 area of ∼100-d-old Tg(CJD) mice was 
comparable to that of wild-type (WT) controls, but there was an inversion of 
metaplasticity, with increased GluN2B phosphorylation, which is indicative of 
enhanced NMDAR activation. Similar but less marked changes were seen in PrP KO 
mice. At ∼300 d of age, the magnitude of LTP increased in Tg(CJD) mice but 
decreased in PrP KO mice, indicating divergent changes in hippocampal synaptic 
responsiveness. Tg(CJD) but not PrP KO mice were intrinsically more susceptible 
than WT controls to focal hippocampal seizures induced by kainic acid. 
IL-1β-positive astrocytes increased in the Tg(CJD) hippocampus, and blocking 
IL-1 receptor signaling restored normal synaptic responses and reduced seizure 
susceptibility. These results indicate that alterations in NMDA-dependent 
glutamatergic transmission in Tg(CJD) mice do not depend solely on PrP 
functional loss. Moreover, astrocytic IL-1β plays a role in the enhanced 
synaptic responsiveness and seizure susceptibility, suggesting that targeting 
IL-1β signaling may offer a novel symptomatic treatment for CJD.SIGNIFICANCE 
STATEMENT Dementia and myoclonic jerks develop in individuals with 
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD), an incurable brain disorder caused by 
alterations in prion protein structure. These individuals are prone to seizures 
and have high brain levels of the inflammatory cytokine IL-1β. Here we show that 
blocking IL-1β receptors with anakinra, the human recombinant form of the 
endogenous IL-1 receptor antagonist used to treat rheumatoid arthritis, 
normalizes hippocampal neurotransmission and reduces seizure susceptibility in a 
CJD mouse model. These results link neuroinflammation to defective 
neurotransmission and the enhanced susceptibility to seizures in CJD and raise 
the possibility that targeting IL-1β with clinically available drugs may be 
beneficial for symptomatic treatment of the disease.
