BACKGROUD: Dipeptidyl peptidase I (DPPI), a lysosomal cysteine protease is 
derived from granule immune cells including mast cell, neutrophils, and toxicity 
T cells. DPPI can activate serine proteases by removal of dipeptides from 
N-termini of the pro-proteases, resulting in granule immune cells activation 
which involved in physiological or pathological responses. Triperygium Wilfordii 
Polyglucoside (TWP) is one of the traditional Chinese medicines, and commonly 
used in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) treatment. The present study intended to 
evaluate the effects of TWP on DPPI activity.
METHODS: In vivo and in vitro studies were carried out to investigate the 
functions of TWP or triptolide (TP) on DPPI activities in serum, tissues of CIA 
rats. Rats were divided into five groups randomly: normal group, untreated CIA 
rat group, TWP treatment CIA groups (the low dose 2.5mg/100g body-weight and 
high dose 5mg/100g body-weight), and TP treatment CIA group (4μg/100g 
body-weight). Arthritis development was monitored visually, and joint pathology 
was examined radiologically. Total protein concentrations in synovial fluids 
(SFs) were determined by BCA method. Serums and tissue homogenates from CIA rats 
were collected and DPPI activities were detected using fluorescence substrate 
GF-AFC. The in vitro interactions between DPPI in serums or in tissue 
homogenates and TWP or TP were assessed.
RESULTS: TWP-treated CIA rats showed a significant improvement in bone erosion. 
TWP significantly suppressed paw swelling and total protein concentration in the 
SFs of CIA rats compared with untreated CIA rats. The elevated activities of 
DPPI in serums or tissues of CIA rats were significantly inhibited by TWP, but 
not by TP in vivo. The inhibitory effects of TWP on DPPI activities were also 
confirm by in vitro study.
CONCLUSION: One of the therapeutic functions of TWP in RA treatment could be 
inhibiting DPPI activity in serums and synovial tissue produced during RA 
development, and then reducing inflammatory serine proteases activities and 
further recovering CIA rats from RA symptoms.
