OBJECTIVE: Functional imaging of synovitis could improve both early detection of 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and long-term outcomes. Given the intersection of 
inflammation with coagulation protease activation, this study was undertaken to 
examine coagulation protease activities in arthritic mice with a 
dual-fluorescence ratiometric activatable cell-penetrating peptide (RACPP) that 
has a linker, norleucine (Nle)-TPRSFL, with a cleavage site for thrombin.
METHODS: K/BxN-transgenic mice with chronic arthritis and mice with day 1 
passive serum-transfer arthritis were imaged in vivo for Cy5:Cy7 emission 
ratiometric fluorescence from proteolytic cleavage and activation of 
RACPPNleTPRSFL . Joint thickness in mice with serum-transfer arthritis was 
measured from days 0 to 10. The cleavage-evoked release of Cy5-tagged 
tissue-adhesive fragments enabled microscopic correlation with 
immunohistochemistry for inflammatory markers. Thrombin dependence of 
ratiometric fluorescence was tested by ex vivo application of RACPPNleTPRSFL and 
argatroban to cryosections obtained from mouse hind paws on day 1 of 
serum-transfer arthritis.
RESULTS: In chronic arthritis, RACPPNleTPRSFL fluorescence ratios of Cy5:Cy7 
emission were significantly higher in diseased swollen ankles of 
K/BxN-transgenic mice than in normal mouse ankles. A high ratio of 
RACPPNleTPRSFL fluorescence in mouse ankles and toes on day 1 of serum-transfer 
arthritis correlated with subsequent joint swelling. Foci of high ratiometric 
fluorescence localized to inflammation, as demarcated by immune reactivity for 
citrullinated histones, macrophages, mast cells, and neutrophils, in soft tissue 
on day 1 of serum-transfer arthritis. Ex vivo application of RACPPNleTPRSFL to 
cryosections obtained from mice on day 1 of serum-transfer arthritis produced 
ratiometric fluorescence that was inhibited by argatroban.
CONCLUSION: RACPPNleTPRSFL activation detects established experimental 
arthritis, and the detection of inflammation by RACPPNleTPRSFL on day 1 of 
serum-transfer arthritis correlates with disease progression.
