Since the original identification of the T helper 17 (Th17) subset in 2005, it 
has become evident that these cells do not only contribute to host defence 
against pathogens, such as bacteria and fungi, but that they are also critically 
involved in the pathogenesis of many autoimmune diseases. In contrast to the 
classic Th1 and Th2 cells, which represent rather stably polarized subsets, 
Th17 cells display remarkable heterogeneity and plasticity. This has been 
attributed to the characteristics of the key transcription factor that guides 
Th17 differentiation, retinoic acid receptor-related orphan nuclear receptor 
gamma (RORγ). Unlike the 'master regulators' T-bet and GATA3 that orchestrate 
Th1 and Th2 differentiation, respectively, RORγ controls transcription at 
relatively few loci in Th17 cells. Moreover, its expression is not stabilized by 
positive feedback loops but rather influenced by environmental cues, allowing 
for substantial functional plasticity. Importantly, a subset of IL-17/IFNγ 
double-producing Th17 cells was identified in both human and mouse models. 
Evidence is accumulating that these IL-17/IFNγ double-producing cells are 
pathogenic drivers in autoimmune diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis, 
multiple sclerosis and inflammatory bowel disease. In addition, IL-17/IFNγ 
double-producing cells have been identified in disorders in which the role of 
autoimmunity remains unclear, such as sarcoidosis. The observed plasticity of 
Th17 cells towards the Th1 phenotype can be explained by extensive epigenetic 
priming of the IFNG locus in Th17 cells. In fact, Th17 cells display an IFNG 
chromatin landscape that is remarkably similar to that of Th1 cells. On the 
other hand, pathogenic capabilities of Th17 cells can be restrained by 
stimulating IL-10 production and transdifferentiation into IL-10 producing T 
regulatory type 1 (Tr1) cells. In this review, we discuss recent advances in our 
knowledge on the cellular and molecular mechanisms involved in Th17 
differentiation, heterogeneity and plasticity. We focus on transcriptional 
regulation of the Th17 expression program, the epigenetic dynamics involved, and 
how genetic variants associated with autoimmunity may affect immune responses 
through distal gene regulatory elements. Finally, the implications of Th17 cell 
plasticity for the pathogenesis and treatment of human autoimmune diseases will 
be discussed.
