BACKGROUND: Previously we established an arthritis-prone FcγRIIB-deficient mouse 
strain (designated KO1). Anti-mouse CD11b mAb (5C6) has been reported to inhibit 
the recruitment of peripheral CD11b+ myelomonocytic cells from the blood to the 
inflammatory site. These cells include neutrophils and monocytes, both of which 
play important roles in the development of arthritis. Here we treated KO1 mice 
with 5C6 mAb in order to study its effect on arthritis development.
METHODS: To evaluate the disease-preventive effect of 5C6, 4-month-old 
preclinical KO1 mice were divided into three groups: the first treated with 5C6 
for 6 months, the second treated with normal rat IgG for 6 months, as a control, 
and the third left untreated. Arthritis severity and immunological abnormalities 
were compared among the groups, along with transcriptional levels of several 
important arthritis-related factors in ankle joints, spleen, and peripheral 
blood cells.
RESULTS: The 5C6 treatment ameliorated arthritis in KO1 mice, showing decreases 
in inflammatory cell infiltration and osteoclast formation. Analysis of 
transcriptional levels in ankle joints revealed that compared with the two 
control groups, the 5C6-treated group showed downregulated expression of RANK, 
RANKL, MCP-1, RANTES, TNFα, and IL-6, and at the same time showed significantly 
up-regulated expression of the decoy receptor for RANKL, i.e. osteoprotegerin. 
In addition, the disease suppression was associated with the lower serum levels 
of autoantibodies, and the decreased frequencies of activated B cells and plasma 
cells. The expression levels of B cell activation/differentiation-related 
cytokines were suppressed in spleen and peripheral leukocytes of the 5C6-treated 
mice. Intriguingly, while untreated KO1 mice spontaneously developed marked 
monocytosis, the 5C6-treated mice showed the significantly down-regulated 
frequency of monocytes.
CONCLUSIONS: The outcome of 5C6 treatment was complex, in which the 5C6-mediated 
disease-preventive effect is likely due on one hand to the decrease in the 
recruitment of inflammatory cells and osteoclast precursor monocytes from the 
periphery into the joints, and on the other hand to the suppression of B cell 
activation/maturation and of autoantibody production via the suppression of B 
cell stimulating cytokine production. The lower levels of these cytokines may be 
the secondary effect of the lower frequency of monocytes, since 
monocytes/macrophages are the major producers of these cytokines.
