BACKGROUND: Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS) is a rare primary immunodeficiency 
caused by mutations in Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein (WASp), a key regulator 
of cytoskeletal dynamics in hematopoietic cells. A high proportion of patients 
experience autoimmunity caused by a breakdown in T- and B-cell tolerance. 
Moreover, excessive production of type I interferon (IFN-I) by plasmacytoid 
dendritic cells (pDCs) contributes to autoimmune signs; however, the factors 
that trigger excessive innate activation have not been defined.
OBJECTIVE: Neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) emerged as major initiating 
factors in patients with diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus and 
rheumatoid arthritis. In this study we explored the possible involvement of 
aberrant neutrophil functions in patients with WAS.
METHODS: We evaluated the expression of a set of granulocyte genes associated 
with NETs in a cohort of patients with WAS and the presence of NET inducers in 
sera. Using a mouse model of WAS, we analyzed NET release by WASp-null 
neutrophils and evaluated the composition and homeostasis of neutrophils 
in vivo. By using depletion experiments, we assessed the effect of neutrophils 
in promoting inflammation and reactivity against autoantigens.
RESULTS: Transcripts of genes encoding neutrophil enzymes and antimicrobial 
peptides were increased in granulocytes of patients with WAS, and serum-soluble 
factors triggered NET release. WASp-null neutrophils showed increased 
spontaneous NETosis, induced IFN-I production by pDCs, and activated B cells 
through B-cell activating factor. Consistently, their depletion abolished 
constitutive pDC activation, normalized circulating IFN-I levels, and, 
importantly, abolished production of autoantibodies directed against 
double-stranded DNA, nucleosomes, and myeloperoxidase.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings reveal that neutrophils are involved in the 
pathogenic loop that causes excessive activation of innate cells and 
autoreactive B cells, thus identifying novel mechanisms that contribute to the 
autoimmunity of WAS.

Copyright © 2018 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. All rights 
reserved.
