BACKGROUND: Tripterygium wilfordii (TW) is widely employed to treat rheumatoid 
arthritis and autoimmune disorders clinically, which, however, accompany with 
disturbing hepatotoxicity and nephrotoxicity. The previous research showed that 
Panax notoginseng (PN) compatibly and significantly reduces the TW-induced 
hepatotoxicity.
OBJECTIVE: To explore the underlying mechanism, the present study was designed 
to reveal the influence of PN on the intestinal absorption process of TW-derived 
active components in rat.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: An in situ single-pass intestinal perfusion technique was 
established and preformed to obtain the perfusate samples of triptolide (TP), 
tripterine (TE), TW extract, and TW-PN extract. A rapid and sensitive 
ultra-performance liquid-chromatography tandem mass spectrometry method was 
subsequently developed and validated to determine the concentrations of TP and 
TE in the perfusate samples. Then, the absorption parameters, effective 
permeability, absorption rate constant, and percentage of 10 cm intestinal 
absorption were calculated strictly.
RESULTS: The final data indicated that both TP and TE have no special absorption 
site in the intestine and are primarily absorbed in a passive manner. Otherwise, 
the absorption of TP was decreased from compatibility of PN, but the absorption 
of TE was enhanced.
CONCLUSION: The absorption reduction of TP and absorption elevation of TE from 
TW initiated by the combination of PN are contributed to attenuate the toxicity 
and reinforce the therapeutic efficacy of TW. It is practically reasonable of 
usage of TW compatibility with PN clinically.
SUMMARY: Panax notoginseng (PN) regulated the absorption process of Tripterygium 
wilfordii (TW) in intestineBoth triptolide (TP) and tripterine (TE), two typical 
components of TW, have no special absorption site in the intestine and are 
primarily absorbed in a passive mannerPN decreased the absorption of TP and 
enhanced the absorption of TE in the intestine. Abbreviations used: 10 cm% ABS: 
percentage of 10 cm intestinal absorption, DMARDs: Disease-modifying 
antirheumatic drugs, GU: Glycyrrhiza uralensis, Ka: Absorption rate constant, 
NSAIDs: Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, Peff: Effective permeability, PN: 
Panax notoginseng, QC: Quality control, RA: Rheumatoid arthritis, RG: Rehmannia 
glutinosa, SPIP: Single-pass intestinal perfusion, TE: Tripterine, TP: 
Triptolide, TW: Tripterygium wilfordii, UPLC-MS/MS: Ultra-performance 
liquid-chromatography tandem mass spectrometry.
