Poligoni Multiflori Radix (PMR) is a traditional Korean medicinal herb that is 
known to have various pharmacological effects, including antihyperlipidemic, 
anticancer, and anti‑inflammatory effects. However, the effects of PMR on bone 
metabolism have not been elucidated to date. The present study aimed to 
investigate the in vitro and in vivo effect of PMR water extract on the 
regulation of osteoblast and osteoclast activity. Effects of PMR water extract 
on receptor activator of nuclear factor‑kB ligand (RANKL)‑induced osteoclast 
differentiation and survival of mouse bone marrow macrophages (BMMs) obtained 
from femurs were investigated by tartrate‑acid resistant acid phosphatase 
(TRAP)‑positive cells and XTT assay. Expression of osteoclast‑related genes was 
assayed by western blot analysis and reverse transcription‑quantitative 
polymerase chain reaction. Additionally, the effects of PMR water extract on 
osteoblastic proliferation and differentiation were investigated by alkaline 
phosphatase (ALP) activity assay, alizarin red staining, and levels of mRNA 
encoding known osteoblast markers. Furthermore, the effects of PMR water extract 
on lipopolysaccharide (LPS)‑induced bone loss were examined in a mouse model. 
PMR inhibited RANKL‑induced osteoclast differentiation of BMMs in a 
dose‑dependent manner without significant cytotoxicity, and suppressed 
expression of the main osteoclast differentiation markers Fos proto‑oncogene and 
nuclear factor of activated T‑cell. In addition, PMR decreased the mRNA 
expression levels of NFATc1 target genes, including TRAP, osteoclast‑associated 
receptor, ATPase H+ transporting, lysosomal 38 kDa V0 subunit d2, and 
Cathepsin K. These inhibitory effects were mediated by the p38 and extracellular 
signal‑regulated kinase/nuclear factor‑κB pathway. Simultaneously, PMR enhanced 
the differentiation of primary osteoblasts, and increased the mRNA expression of 
runt‑related transcription factor 2, ALP, osterix, and osteocalcin. Notably, PMR 
improved LPS‑induced trabecular bone loss in mice. Collectively, the present 
findings demonstrated that PMR may regulate bone remodeling by reducing 
osteoclast differentiation and stimulating osteoblast formation. These results 
suggest that PMR may be used for the treatment of bone diseases, such as 
osteoporosis and rheumatoid arthritis.
