INTRODUCTION: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) represents the most commonly occurring 
inflammatory type of arthritis and is a major cause of disability. Reports have 
placed emphasis on the potential of, granzyme B (GZMB) as a potentially valuable 
prognostic marker in early RA, the mechanism of which still remains largely 
unclear. Thus, the aim of the current study was to investigate the effects GZMB 
gene silencing influences synovial tissue hyperplasia and articular cartilage 
tissue injury of RA through the regulation of the MAPK signaling pathway.
METHODS: Following the successful establishment of the collagen-induced animal 
model of RA in rats, a five-grade scoring method was applied to evaluate the 
swelling degree measurement of the rats for model identification. The various 
rat responses to GZMB shRNA and U-46619 (activator of the MAPK signaling 
pathway) were subsequently detected. The general status of rats was observed and 
recorded, with their weight and ankle diameter kept accurate record of. ELISA 
was employed to detect the levels of inflammatory cytokines, while RT-qPCR and 
Western blotting techniques were applied to determine the expressions of GZMB 
and pathway-related genes and proteins.
RESULTS: GZMB gene silencing was observed to aid in the maintenance of rat 
weight increases, while acting to reduce the degree of ankle swelling, while 
hypertrophy of the synovial tissue and the injury of the articular cartilage 
tissue were not obvious. GZMB gene silencing was shown to decrease inflammatory 
cytokine levels, as well as decreased bcl-2, Cyclin D1, VEGF and bFGF while 
increasing caspase 3. Notably, GZMB gene silencing suppressed the activation of 
the MAPK signaling pathway by reducing the phosphorylation extent of ERK and 
MEK.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, the key findings of the present study ultimately 
suggest that GZMB gene silencing acts to inhibit MAPK signaling pathway through 
regulating the expressions of inflammatory factors, factors correlated with 
apoptosis (bcl-2 and caspase), as well as factors associated with angiogenesis 
(VEGF and bFGF), thus relieving synovial tissue hyperplasia and articular 
cartilage tissue injury brought about by RA. The GZMB gene could well be a new 
therapeutic target for RA treatment.
