BACKGROUND: Collagen XI (CXI) is a heterotrimeric molecule with triple helical 
structure in which the α3(XI) chain is identical to the α1(II) chain of collagen 
II (CII), but with extensive posttranslational modifications. CXI molecules are 
intermingled in the cartilage collagen fibers, which are mainly composed of CII. 
One of the alpha chains in CXI is shared with CII and contains the 
immunodominant T cell epitope, but it is unclear whether there are shared B cell 
epitopes as the antibodies tend to recognize the triple helical structures.
METHODS: Mice expressing the susceptible immune response gene Aq were immunized 
with CII or CXI. Serum antibody responses were measured, monoclonal antibodies 
were isolated and analyzed for specificity to CII, CXI, and triple helical 
collagen peptides using bead-based multiplex immunoassays, enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assays, and Western blots. Arthritogenicity of the antibodies was 
investigated by passive transfer experiments.
RESULTS: Immunization with CII or CXI leads to a strong T and B cell response, 
including a cross-reactive response to both collagen types. Immunization with 
CII leads to severe arthritis in mice, with a response toward CXI at the chronic 
stage, whereas CXI immunization induces very mild arthritis only. A series of 
monoclonal antibodies to CXI were isolated and of these, the L10D9 antibody 
bound to both CXI and CII equally strong, with a specific binding for the D3 
epitope region of α3(XI) or α1(II) chain. The L10D9 antibody binds cartilage in 
vivo and induced severe arthritis. In contrast, the L5F3 antibody only showed 
weak binding and L7D8 antibody has no binding to cartilage and did not induce 
arthritis. The arthritogenic L10D9 antibody bound to an epitope shared with CII, 
the triple helical D3 epitope. Antibody levels to the shared D3 epitope were 
elevated in the sera from mice with arthritis as well as in rheumatoid 
arthritis.
CONCLUSION: CXI is immunologically not exposed in healthy cartilage but contains 
T and B cell epitopes cross-reactive with CII, which could be activated in both 
mouse and human arthritis and could evoke an arthritogenic response.
