Tetraspanins function as membrane adaptors altering cell-cell fusion, antigen 
presentation, receptor-mediated signal transduction and cell motility via 
interaction with membrane proteins including other tetraspanins and adhesion 
molecules such as integrins. CD82 is expressed in several malignant cells and 
well described as tumour metastasis suppressor. Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is 
based on persistent synovial inflammation and joint destruction driven to a 
large extent by transformed-appearing activated synovial fibroblasts (SF) with 
an increased migratory potential.
OBJECTIVE: CD82 is upregulated in RA synovial fibroblasts (RASF) compared with 
osteoarthritis (OA) SF as well as within RA compared with OA synovial lining 
layer (LL) and the role of CD82 in RASF was evaluated.
METHODS: CD82 and integrin immunofluorescence was performed. Lentiviral CD82 
overexpression and siRNA-mediated knockdown was confirmed (realtime-PCR, Western 
blot, immunocytochemistry). RASF migration (Boyden chamber, scrape assay), 
attachment towards plastic/Matrigel, RASF-binding to endothelial cells (EC) and 
CD82 expression during long-term invasion in the SCID-mouse-model were 
evaluated.
RESULTS: CD82 was induced by proinflammatory stimuli in SF. In RA-synovium, CD82 
was expressed in RASF close to blood vessels, LL, sites of cartilage invasion 
and colocalised with distinct integrins involved in tumour metastasis 
suppression but also in RA-synovium by RASF. CD82 overexpression led to reduced 
RASF migration, cell-matrix and RASF-EC adhesion. Reduced CD82 expression 
(observed in the sublining) increased RASF migration and matrix adhesion whereas 
RASF-EC-interaction was reduced. In SCID mice, the presence of CD82 on 
cartilage-invading RASF was confirmed.
CONCLUSION: CD82 could contribute to RASF migration to sites of inflammation and 
tissue damage, where CD82 keeps aggressive RASF on site.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2018. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.
