BACKGROUND: Pain accompanies rheumatoid arthritis and other chronic inflammatory 
conditions and is difficult to manage. Although opioids provide potent 
analgesia, chronic opioid use can cause tolerance and addiction. Recent studies 
have demonstrated functional interactions between chemokine and opioid receptor 
signaling pathways. Reported heterodimerization of chemokine and opioid 
receptors led our group to develop bivalent compounds that bind both types of 
receptors, with the goal of targeting opioids to sites of inflammation. MCC22 is 
a novel bivalent compound containing a CCR5 antagonist and mu opioid receptor 
(MOR) agonist pharmacophores linked through a 22-atom spacer. We evaluated the 
efficacy of MCC22 in the K/B.g7 T-cell receptor transgenic mouse model of 
spontaneous inflammatory arthritis.
METHODS: MCC22 or morphine was administered intraperitoneally at varying doses 
to arthritic K/B.g7 mice or nonarthritic control mice. Mechanical pain 
hypersensitivity was measured each day before and after drug administration, 
using the electronic von Frey test. The potency of MCC22 relative to that of 
morphine was calculated. Functional readouts of pain included grip strength and 
nesting behavior. A separate dosing regimen was used to determine whether the 
drugs induced pharmacologic tolerance.
RESULTS: MCC22 provided ~ 3000-fold more potent analgesia than morphine in this 
model. Daily treatment with MCC22 also led to a cumulative analgesic effect, 
reducing the daily baseline pain level. MCC22 produced no observable analgesic 
effect in nonarthritic control mice. Importantly, repeated administration of 
MCC22 did not induce pharmacologic tolerance, whereas a similar regimen of 
morphine did. Both grip strength and nesting behaviors improved among arthritic 
mice treated with MCC22. Ankle thickness and arthritis scores were not affected 
by MCC22. The analgesic effect of MCC22 was abolished in K/B.g7 mice genetically 
lacking CCR5, demonstrating the receptor specificity of the antagonist 
pharmacophore.
CONCLUSIONS: MCC22 is a novel bivalent ligand that targets CCR5 and MOR. Our 
findings demonstrate that MCC22 provides highly potent analgesia and improved 
functional outcomes in a model of inflammatory arthritis, without inducing 
typical opioid tolerance. These findings suggest that MCC22 or similar compounds 
could be used to treat the pain associated with inflammatory arthritis and 
related conditions, while minimizing the risks typically associated with chronic 
opioid use.
