Leukocytes travel within the circulation and enter connective tissues by 
interactions with endothelium of postcapillary venules mediated by cell adhesion 
molecules, summarized as the leukocyte adhesion cascade. In the severe combined 
immunodeficient (SCID) mouse model, rheumatoid arthritis (RA) synovial 
fibroblasts (SF) migrated to distant cartilage through the vasculature. 
Therefore, RASF adhesion toward endothelial cells (EC) and E- and P-selectins 
were analyzed. Cell-to-cell binding assays between SF and EC were performed. 
Interactions of SF with tumor necrosis factor α (TNFα)-activated EC or selectins 
were analyzed in flow adhesion assays. Immunohistochemistry for E-selectin 
ligand CD15s was performed. CD15s induction in RASF by human serum or media was 
evaluated. Wild-type and E-/-/ P-/- Selectin-SCID mice were used for 
inverse-wrap surgery. After laser-mediated microdissection, real-time PCR for 
E-/P-selectin/vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 was performed. Adhesion between 
SF/EC under static conditions was highest in Roswell Park Memorial 
Institute-cultured RASF to TNFαα-activated human umbilical vein endothelial 
cells (2.25-fold) and RASF adhesion was higher toward venous than arterial EC 
(Dulbecco's modified eagle medium P = 0.0419, RPMI P = 0.0119). In flow chamber 
assays, RASF adhesion to E-selectin was higher than to P-selectin (e.g. 
0.9 dyn cm-2 P = 0.0001). Osteoarthritis synovial fibroblasts showed lower 
rolling/adhesion properties (e.g. 0.5 dyn cm-2 , P = 0.0010). RASF adhesion to 
TNFαα-activated EC was increased (e.g. 0.9 dyn cm-2 , P = 0.0061). CD15s 
induction in RASF was strongest in RA serum. Vimentin/CD15s double-positive 
cells were detectable. In E-/P-selectin-deficient mice, contralateral invasion 
was reduced (P = 0.023). E- and P-selectin, and vascular cell adhesion molecule 
1 expression in EC of implants was confirmed. Our data indicate that the milieu 
within vessels induces CD15s which enables RASF to interact with E-selectin/EC 
under flow. Therefore, RASF may migrate to distant sites and leave the 
vasculature similarly to leukocytes.
