BACKGROUND: Studies have identified that the fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS) 
exhibited tumor-like characteristics and was the key factor in the pathogenesis 
of Rheumatoid arthritis (RA). GANT61, an antagonist of the sonic hedgehog 
pathway, has been verified with inhibitory effect on many cancers. Here we 
investigated the effect of GANT61 on FLS and the development of collagen-induced 
arthritis (CIA).
METHODS: 40 Sprague Dawley (SD) rats were randomly divided into four groups: 
normal, CIA, CIA+10 mg/kg GANT61 and CIA+20 mg/kg GANT61. CIA was induced in rat 
with collagen injecting. The GANT61 was administered by intraperitoneal 
injection every 2 days for 3 weeks. The CIA model was identified with the paw 
swelling, arthritis score and the pathologic changes in joint. The FLS of 
different group were primary cultured. The proliferative capacity of FLS was 
detecteded via Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8) method, and the apoptosis was 
detecteded by flow cytometry. The Bcl-2, Bax, Caspases3 and cleaved Caspases3 in 
synovium and FLS were detecteded by Western Blot.
RESULTS: The 20 mg/kg GANT61 treatment reduced the incidence of CIA and relieved 
the arthritis symptoms in CIA rats. The Bcl-2 was upregulated and the Bax was 
downregulated in the CIA rats synovium. The 10 mg/kg and 20 mg/kg GANT61 
diminished the Bcl-2 expression, 20 mg/kg GANT61 increased the Bax and activated 
the Caspases3 in the CIA synovium. The proliferation of CIA-FLS was 
significantly higher and the apoptosis of the CIA-FLS was lower than that of the 
control group. The 10 mg/kg and 20 mg/kg GANT61 treatment can reduce cell 
proliferation and induce apoptosis by diminishing Bcl-2 and increasing the Bax 
in CIA-FLS.
CONCLUSIONS: The GANT61 inhibit the proliferation of FLS and alleviated the 
arthritic symptoms in CIA rats, this implied the GANT61 may be recommended as a 
possible candidate for the therapy of RA.

Copyright © 2018 The Japanese Orthopaedic Association. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.
