The aim of this study was to investigate the inhibitory effect of salvianolic 
acid on inflammatory mediators of rats with collagen-induced rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA). Thirty rats were randomly divided into the normal control group, 
collagen-induced arthritis model group (CIA model group) and drug group 
(Salvianolic Acid-CIA group). In the model group, the CIA models were 
established through intradermal injection of collagen emulsion at the toes. At 3 
weeks after the model establishment, grouped drug administration was conducted, 
of which salvianolic acid was given by gavage to Salvianolic Acid-CIA group. The 
degrees of joint swelling of each group of rats were recorded. Enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) was applied to detect the levels of relevant 
inflammatory mediators, reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase chain 
reaction (RT-qPCR) was used to measure the messenger RNA (mRNA) expression 
levels of serum necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α), interleukin-6 (IL-6) and 
prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), and hematoxylin and eosin staining was utilized to 
detect the pathological characteristics of the synovial tissues. After the 
establishment of models, the ankle joint swelling degree of rats in the model 
group was more obvious compared with that in the normal control group (P<0.01). 
After 3 weeks of drug administration, the ankle joint swelling degree of rats in 
the Salvianolic Acid-CIA group was alleviated compared with that in the model 
group (P<0.05). The contents of TNF-α, IL-6 and PGE2 in Salvianolic Acid-CIA 
group were obviously lower than those in the model group (P<0.01). The mRNA 
expression levels of TNF-α, IL-6 and PGE2 in the Salvianolic Acid-CIA group were 
markedly lower than those in the model group. The hyperemia of rat synovial 
tissues in Salvianolic Acid-CIA group was obviously relieved compared with that 
in the CIA model group. In conclusion, the models of CIA rats are successfully 
established, and the results show salvianolic acid has an inhibitory effect on 
the RA of CIA model rats and can significantly inhibit the expression levels of 
relevant inflammatory mediators.
