As a potent macrolide immunosuppressant, cyclosporine A (CsA) is used to treat 
multiple autoimmune diseases, including non-autoimmune and autoimmune-mediated 
dry eye disease, rheumatoid arthritis and psoriasis. Despite its potency, CsA 
has poor solubility, poor bioavailability, and can cause serious adverse 
reactions such as nephrotoxicity and neurotoxicity. To overcome these 
limitations, we invented a new strategy to carry CsA by fusing its cognate human 
receptor, cyclophilin A (CypA), to a 73 kDa elastin-like polypeptide (ELP) 
termed A192 using recombinant protein expression. Derived from human 
tropoelastin, ELPs are characterized by the ability to phase separate above a 
temperature that is a function of variables including concentration, molecular 
weight, and hydrophobicity. The resultant fusion protein, termed CA192, which 
assembles into a dimeric species in solution, effectively binds and solubilizes 
CsA with a Kd of 189 nM, comparable to that of endogenous CypA with a Kd of 
35.5 nM. The release profile of CsA from CA192 follows a one phase decay model 
with a half-life of 957.3 h without a burst release stage. Moreover, CA192-CsA 
inhibited IL-2 expression induced in Jurkat cells through the calcineurin-NFAT 
signaling pathway with an IC50 of 1.2 nM, comparable to that of free CsA with an 
IC50 of 0.5 nM. The intravenous pharmacokinetics of CA192 followed a 
two-compartment model with a mean residence time of 7.3 h. Subcutaneous 
administration revealed a bioavailability of 30% and a mean residence time of 
15.9 h. When given subcutaneously for 2 weeks starting at 14 weeks in male 
non-obese diabetic (NOD) mice, a model of autoimmune dacryoadenitis used to 
study Sjögren's syndrome (SS), CA192-CsA (2.5 mg/kg, every other day) 
significantly (p = 0.014) increased tear production relative to CA192 alone. 
Moreover, CA192 delivery reduced indications of CsA nephrotoxicity relative to 
free CsA. CA192 represents a viable new approach to deliver this effective but 
nephrotoxic agent in a modality that preserves therapeutic efficacy but 
suppresses drug toxicity.
