BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Polygonum orientale L. (family: Polygonaceae), named 
Hongcao in China, has effects of dispelling wind and dampness, promoting blood 
circulation, and relieving pain. Our group has already studied and confirmed 
that POEa and POEe (ethyl acetate and ethyl ether extract of P. orientale, 
respectively) had anti-inflammatory and analgesic effects in early research, 
which was mainly relevant to the existence of flavonoids. According to the 
clinical application of P. orientale in traditional Chinese medicine, it has 
long been used for rheumatic arthralgia and rheumatoid arthritis. Therefore, our 
group further explored whether flavonoids of P. orientale have anti-rheumatoid 
arthritis effect and how does they play this role.
METHODS: Dried small pieces of the stems and leaves of P. orientale were 
decocted with water and partitioned successively to obtain POEa and POEe, 
respectively. The anti-rheumatoid arthritis effect of P. orientale was studied 
by using a Freund's complete adjuvant (FCA)-induced arthritis (AIA) in a rat 
model. The levels of PGE2, TNF-α, and IL-1β in serum of AIA rats were detected 
by enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) to explore its mechanisms. In 
addition, we computationally studied the relationships between the 15 chemical 
components of POEa and POEe, and the currently focused 9 target proteins of 
rheumatoid arthritis by molecular docking.
RESULTS: Pharmacological experiments showed that POEa and POEe significantly 
ameliorate symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis via reducing paw swelling volume, 
arthritis score, and thymus and spleen indices, as well as increasing body 
weight in AIA rats. Simultaneously, the concentrations of PGE2, TNF-α, and IL-1β 
were significantly decreased by POEa and POEe. Histopathology revealed 
noticeable reduction in bone and cartilage, synovial hyperplasia, inflammatory 
cell infiltration, cartilage surface erosion, and joint degeneration by POEa and 
POEe treatment. In addition, the molecular docking studies showed that docking 
scores of 14 chemical compositions (including 12 flavonoids and 2 phenolic 
acids) of POEa and POEe with anti-rheumatoid arthritis protein targets were 
better than the complexed ligands of the anti-rheumatoid arthritis protein 
targets. Among them, six flavonoids in POEa and POEe had more docking protein 
targets (n ≥ 3). Five anti-rheumatoid arthritis targets including 
high-temperature requirement A1 protease (HtrA1), janus kinase 1 (JAK1), 
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), inducible nitric oxide synthase (i-NOS), and 
prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) had better docking score compared with the complexed 
ligands. Moreover, most of the chemical components in POEa and POEe showed 
strong interaction with HtrA1.
CONCLUSIONS: The flavonoids of P. orientale have anti-rheumatoid arthritis 
effect. In addition, the molecular docking results indicate that quercetin, 
catechol, orientin, and other six flavonoids may be closely related to HtrA1, 
JAK1, COX-2, i-NOS, and PGE2 protein target receptors. It suggests that these 
chemical compositions form strong protein-ligand complexes with these protein 
targets, especially HtrA1 to exert anti-rheumatoid arthritis. Further 
experimental studies show that mechanisms of anti-rheumatoid arthritis effects 
may also be relevant to inhibit the levels of PGE2, TNF-α, and IL-1β in serum. 
Therefore, our group can further explore the possible active ingredients and 
mechanisms of the anti-rheumatoid arthritis effects of flavonoids, and focus on 
the inhibition of the expression of inflammatory factors and the TGF-β1/Smad 
signaling pathway associated with HtrA1 protein target receptors, which can 
provide a direction and powerful reference for the action mechanism and drug 
research of anti-rheumatoid arthritis of flavonoids in P. orientale.

Copyright © 2018 European Federation of Immunological Societies. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
