BACKGROUND: The cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway (CAP) has a strong 
anti-inflammatory effect on collagen-induced arthritis (CIA), a classic animal 
model of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). However, the underlying immune regulatory 
mechanism remains unclear. Here, we investigated the effect of the CAP on 
arthritis development and the involvement of dendritic cells (DCs).
METHODS: Forty DBA/1 mice were randomly divided into five groups: a control 
group (sham vagotomy+ phosphate-buffered saline; shamVGX+PBS), a CIA group 
(shamVGX+CIA + PBS), a vagotomy group (VGX + CIA + PBS), a GTS-21 (4 mg/kg) 
group (shamVGX+CIA + GTS-4), and a GTS-21 (8 mg/kg) group (shamVGX+CIA + GTS-8). 
The vagotomy group underwent left cervical vagotomy 4 days before arthritis 
induction, whereas the sham-vagotomy group underwent vagus nerve exposure. Mice 
were pretreated with GTS-21 by intraperitoneal injection on the day of surgery. 
The degree of arthritis was measured by using the arthritis score, hematoxylin 
and eosin staining, and TRAP (tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase) staining. 
Flow cytometry was used to detect the expression of CD80 and major 
histocompatibility complex II (MHC II) on CD11c+ DCs in the spleen. Luminex was 
used to detect the serum concentration of interleukin-6 (IL-6), tumor necrosis 
factor-alpha (TNFα), and IL-10. Immunohistochemistry was used to detect CD11c 
expression in the synovium. The effects of GTS-21 on DC differentiation and 
maturation were examined in vitro by treating bone marrow-derived DCs with 
GTS-21 and assessing differentiation and maturation. Flow cytometry was used to 
analyze CD80 and MHC II expression on the surface of DCs.
RESULTS: GTS-21 treatment ameliorated clinical arthritis in a mouse model of CIA 
in vivo, decreasing the secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines in the serum and 
downregulating CD80 and MHC II expression on DCs in the spleen of CIA mice. 
GTS-21 treatment strongly suppressed the infiltration of DCs into the synovium. 
Vagotomy itself did not exacerbate the severity of arthritis in CIA mice. In 
vitro, GTS-21 (10 μmol/L) significantly downregulated CD80 and MHC II in bone 
marrow-derived immature DCs and this effect was blocked by the α7-nicotinic 
acetylcholine receptor antagonist methyllycaconitine (MLA). However, GTS-21 had 
no effects on mature DCs.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study provides new insight into the mechanism 
underlying the effects of the CAP on RA and indicates that the immunosuppressive 
effect of GTS-21 may be mediated by the inhibition of DC differentiation.
