BACKGROUND: Standardized extract of Phyllanthus amarus has been shown to possess 
inhibitory effects on cellular and humoral immune responses in Wistar-Kyoto rats 
and Balb/c mice.
OBJECTIVE: In the present study, the standardized extract of P. amarus was 
investigated for its suppressive effects on type II collagen-induced rheumatoid 
arthritis (TCIA) in Sprague Dawley rats.
METHOD: The major components of the extracts, lignans and phenolic compounds 
were analysed by using a validated reversed phase HPLC and LC-MS/MS. A 
rheumatoid arthritis rat model was induced by administering a bovine type II 
collagen emulsion subcutaneously at the base of tail, on day 0 and 7 of the 
experiment. Effects of the extract on severity assessment, changes in the hind 
paw volume, bone mineral density, body weight and body temperature were 
measured. Concentrations of cytokines (TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-1α, IL-6) released, 
matrix metalloproteinases (MMP-1, MMP-3 MMP-9) and their inhibitor (TIMP-1), 
haematological and biochemical changes were also measured. ELISA was used to 
measure the cytokines and proteinases in the rat serum and synovial fluid 
according to manufacturer's instructions.
RESULTS: The extract dose-dependently modulated the progression in physical 
parameters (i.e. decrease in body weight, increase in body temperature, reduced 
hind paw volume, reduced the severity of arthritis), bone mineral density, 
haematological and biochemical perturbations, serum cytokines production and 
levels of matrix metalloproteinases and their inhibitor in the synovial fluid. 
Histopathological examination of the knee joint also revealed that the extract 
effectively reduced synovitis, pannus formation, bone resorption and cartilage 
destruction.
CONCLUSION: The results suggest that the oral administration of a standardized 
extract of P. amarus was able to suppress the humoral and cellular immune 
responses to type II collagen, resulting in the reduction of the development of 
TCIA in the rats.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.
