Staphylococcus aureus (Sa), as one of the major human pathogens, has very 
effective strategies to subvert the human immune system. Virulence of the 
emerging community-associated methicillin-resistant Sa (CA-MRSA) depends on the 
secretion of phenol-soluble modulin (PSM) peptide toxins e.g., by binding to and 
modulation of innate immune cells. Previously, by using mouse bone 
marrow-derived dendritic cells we demonstrated that PSMs in combination with 
various Toll-like receptor (TLR) ligands induce a tolerogenic DC phenotype (tDC) 
characterized by the production of IL-10 and impaired secretion of 
pro-inflammatory cytokines. Consequently, PSM-induced tDCs favored priming of 
CD4+CD25+FoxP3+ Tregs with suppressor function while impairing the Th1 response. 
However, the relevance of these findings for the human system remained elusive. 
Here, we analyzed the impact of PSMα3 on the maturation, cytokine production, 
antigen uptake, and T cell stimulatory capacity of human monocyte-derived DCs 
(moDCs) treated simultaneously with either LPS (TLR4 ligand) or Sa cell lysate 
(TLR2 ligand). Herein, we demonstrate that PSMs indeed modulate human moDCs upon 
treatment with TLR2/4 ligands via multiple mechanisms, such as transient pore 
formation, impaired DC maturation, inhibited pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokine 
secretion, as well as reduced antigen uptake. As a result, the adaptive immune 
response was altered shown by an increased differentiation of naïve and even 
CD4+ T cells from patients with Th1/Th17-induced diseases (spondyloarthritis and 
rheumatoid arthritis) into CD4+CD127-CD25hiCD45RA-FoxP3hi regulatory T cells 
(Tregs) with suppressor function. This Treg induction was mediated most 
predominantly by direct DC-T-cell interaction. Thus, PSMs from highly virulent 
Sa strains affect DC functions not only in the mouse, but also in the human 
system, thereby modulating the adaptive immune response and probably increasing 
the tolerance toward the bacteria. Moreover, PSMα3 might be a novel peptide for 
tolerogenic DC induction that may be used for DC vaccination strategies.
