Gancao Fuzi decoction (GFD) is a classic Chinese medicine formula for the 
treatment of rheumatic and rheumatoid arthritis. The main active components of 
GFD are alkaloids, flavonoids and saponins. This study aimed to clarify the 
pharmacodynamic effects of the active components in GFD and investigate the 
mechanism of them treating rheumatoid arthritis rats by the method of 
metabonomics. Seven groups were studied, named as the normal group (NG), the 
model group (MG), the Gancao Fuzi decoction treatment group (GFDe), the 
alkaloids group (ALK), the compatibility of alkaloids with flavonoids group 
(AF), the compatibility of alkaloids with saponins group (AS) and the 
compatibility of alkaloids with flavonoids and saponins group (AFS), 
respectively. Firstly, the anti-inflammatory and analgesic effects of these 
groups were studied. Besides, urinary metabonomics based on ultra 
high-performance liquid chromatography-quadrupole time-of-flight mass 
spectrometry (UHPLC-Q-TOF-MS) was employed for delineation of metabolic 
alterations in the rats. Based on our results, it is concluded that AFS showed 
better anti-inflammatory and analgesic activities in GFD. Urinary metabonomic 
study and multivariate statistical analyses were used to investigate the 
mechanism of different groups. 26 potential biomarkers have been identified. By 
the analysis of heat map combined with score plot, the AFS group was the closest 
group to the NG group after treatment in GFD. The changes of urinary endogenous 
metabolites showed that AFS exhibited better effect on regulating the taurine 
and hypotaurine metabolism, phenylalanine metabolism, TCA cycle, tryptophan 
metabolism, fatty acid metabolism, vitamin B6 metabolism, arginine and proline 
metabolism and purine metabolism pathways. The pharmacodynamics results showed 
that three components of flavonoids, saponins and alkaloids in GFD played an 
overall efficacy. Metabonomics studies showed that the compatibility of three 
components in GFD achieved the therapeutic effect by regulating the 
perturbations of multiple metabolic pathways.
