Methotrexate (MTX), an antifolate, is the anchor drug for the treatment of 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA). It is inexpensive, effective, and generally safe. 
When clinical response is inadequate, biological therapies are commonly used in 
combination with MTX. However, biological agents have safety concerns (i.e. 
infections, malignancy) and the addition of a biologic agent is expensive, 
making strategies to improve MTX efficacy important. Inhibition of pathways of 
folate metabolism involving purine metabolism by MTX, have been traditionally 
emphasized as important in MTX efficacy. However, inhibition MTX catabolism may 
also be important. MTX is irreversibly hydroxylated to form 7-hydroxy 
methotrexate (7-OH-MTX) by aldehyde oxidase (EC 1.2.3.1) (AOX). Catabolism of 
MTX to 7-OH-MTX is the first metabolic process imposed on an oral dose of MTX 
and will alter subsequent interactions of MTX with other enzymes. 7-OH-MTX is 
less potent than MTX in the treatment of rat adjuvant arthritis. RA patients 
with a low capacity to catabolize MTX to 7-OH-MTX do better clinically than 
individuals who are rapid formers of 7-OH-MTX. Therefore, altering the 
catabolism of MTX may be an innovative way to improve MTX efficacy. Raloxifene 
is a FDA-approved therapy for postmenopausal osteoporosis and for the reduction 
of invasive breast cancers but has no known activity in RA. Raloxifene is a 
potent inhibitor of human liver AOX. Postmenopausal women with RA frequently 
have low bone mineral density and would be candidates for raloxifene and MTX 
combination therapy. The effect of raloxifene on MTX metabolism has never been 
studied. Our hypothesis is that in postmenopausal women with RA and osteoporosis 
treated with MTX and raloxifene, the inhibition of AOX with resultant decreased 
formation of 7-OH MTX; will increase MTX levels and improve MTX efficacy. This 
hypothesis could be studied in an open-label, proof of concept clinical study in 
individuals before and after the addition of raloxifene. Red blood cell MTX and 
7-OH-MTX levels and RA disease activity (DAS28) would be measured. In possible 
future studies, there are dietary substances, as supplements, (e.g. 
epigallocatechin gallate in green tea and resveratrol) which inhibit human liver 
AOX which could be evaluated.
