Objective To observe the effect of Longzuan Tongbi Recipe (LTR) on Fas/FasL sys- 
tems in serum and synovium of collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) rats. Methods Ten 
rats were randomly selected from 60 male Wistar rats as a normal control group. 
CIA model was prepared by injecting type II bovine collagen and incomplete 
Freund's adjuvant mixture in the rest 50 rats. After modeling rats were di- 
vided into the model group, the methotrexate (MTX) group, high, middle, and low 
dose LTR groups, 10 in each group. Normal saline was administered to rats in the 
model group by gastrogavage. MTX solution (0.27 mg/100 g) was administered to 
rats in the MTX group by gastrogavage, once per week for 4 succes- sive weeks. 
LTR (4.32, 2.16, 1.08 g/mL) was administered to rats in the 3 LTR groups by 
gastrogavage, twice per day for 30 successive days. Morphological changes of 
synovium were observed by HE staining. Expression levels of Fas/FasL in rat 
serum and synovium were quantitatively detected by ELISA. Results Normal 
synovium cells could be seen in the normal group. But they were obviously 
proliferated, fat cells in the lower synovium were reduced or deformed, 
fibroblasts were increased in the model group, accompa- nied with infiltration 
of lymphocytes and monocytes. All these changes were more obviously alleviated 
in the MTX group, and the 3 LTR groups. Compared withI the normal control group, 
Fas expression level in- creased in rat serum and synovium, serum FasL 
expression level decreased in the model group (P <0. 05, P <0. 01). Compared 
with the model group, Fas expression level decreased in rat serum and synovium 
in the MTX group, high and middle dose LTR groups; Fas expression level in rat 
serum increased in the MTX group and 3 LTR groups; Fas expression level in 
synovium increased in the MTX group, high and middle dose LTR groups (P <0. 05, 
P <0. 01). Compared with the MTX group, Fas expression level in serum of the low 
dose LTR group, and Fas expression level in synovium of low and middle dose LTR 
groups was elevat- ed; Fas expression level in serum and synovium of the high 
dose LTR group was reduced; FasL expres- sion level in serum and synovium of low 
and middle dose LTR groups was reduced; FasL expression level in serum and 
synovium increased of the high dose LTR group (P <0. 05, P <0. 01). Conclusion 
LTR could control and treat rheumatoid arthritis, and its mechanism might lie in 
regulating. Fas/FasL systems media- ted cell apoptosis, and relieving 
pathological reaction of rheumatoid arthritis.
