Monoclonal antibodies are antibodies that have a high degree of specificity 
(mono-specificity) for an antigen or epitope. Monoclonal antibodies are 
typically derived from a clonal expansion of antibody producing malignant human 
plasma cells. The initial monoclonal antibodies were created by fusing spleen 
cells from an immunized mouse with human or mouse myeloma cells (malignant 
self-perpetuating antibody producing cells), and selecting out and cloning the 
hybrid cells (hybridomas) that produced the desired antibody reactivity. These 
initial monoclonal products were mouse antibodies and were very valuable in 
laboratory and animal research and diagnostic assays, but were problematic as 
therapeutic agents because of immune reactions to the foreign mouse protein. 
Subsequently, production of chimeric mouse-human monoclonal antibodies and means 
of further “humanizing” them and producing fully human recombinant monoclonal 
antibodies were developed. The conventions used in nomenclature of monoclonal 
antibodies indicate whether they are mouse (-omab), chimeric (-ximab), humanized 
(-zumab) or fully human (-umab). Monoclonal antibodies have broad clinical and 
experimental medical uses. Many of the initial monoclonal antibodies used in 
clinical medicine were immunomodulatory agents with activity against specific 
immune cells, such as CD4 or CD3 lymphocytes, which are important in the 
pathogenesis of rejection after solid organ transplantation. Subsequently, 
monoclonal antibodies were prepared against specific cytokines (anti-cytokines), 
which were believed to play a role in cell and tissue damage in immunologically 
mediated diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, alkylosing spondylitis, 
inflammatory bowel disease, multiple sclerosis and psoriasis, among others. In 
addition, therapeutic monoclonal antibodies were developed, aimed at blocking or 
inhibiting the activity of specific enzymes, cell surface transporters or 
signaling molecules and have been used in cancer chemotherapy and to treat 
severe viral infections. Use of monoclonal antibodies is currently broadening to 
therapy of other severe, nonmalignant conditions including asthma, atopic 
dermatitis, migraine headaches, hypercholesterolemia, osteoporosis and viral or 
bacterial infections. Thus, the therapeutic monoclonal antibodies do not fall 
into a single class and have broad therapeutic uses. As of 2018, more than 60 
therapeutic monoclonal antibodies are approved and in use in the United States. 
Monoclonal antibodies are generally well tolerated. Because they are large 
proteins (typically 150-200,000 daltons in size) they require parenteral, often 
intravenous, administration. Circulating proteins are metabolized by many cells, 
but particularly by hepatocytes. Proteins undergo hepatic uptake by endocytosis 
and are either degraded or recycled to the cell surface for secretion. The 
hepatic metabolism of antibodies often determines their half-life. Proteins are 
broken down by cellular proteases into small peptides and amino acids that can 
used to synthesize other proteins. Metabolism of proteins does not generate 
toxic intermediates and, therefore, monoclonal antibodies are unlikely to induce 
drug induced liver injury via production of toxic metabolites. On the other 
hand, the peptides that are generated by the metabolism of the exogenously 
administered protein may ultimately be presented as foreign epitopes and 
generate an immune response. In addition, the primary effect of the monoclonal 
antibody may generate a response, either immune or otherwise, that leads to an 
immune mediate hepatic injury. Finally, monoclonal antibodies that suppress the 
immune system may cause reactivation of latent infections, including 
tuberculosis and hepatitis B.
